Preface
Although the underlying principles of medical imaging have not changed in the
nine years since the ﬁrst edition of this book was published, the instrumentation
and practices have continued to evolve and improve. This second edition
maintains the signals and systems focus of the ﬁrst edition, with up-to-date
descriptions of instrumentation. We still cover the most important imaging
modalities in radiology: projection radiography, x-ray computed tomography,
nuclear medicine scintigraphy and emission tomography, ultrasound imaging,
and magnetic resonance imaging. But we now provide additional material
on digital radiography, multi-row detector CT systems, 3D ultrasound, both
functional and diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging, and much more.
As before, we expect the reader to be familiar with signals and systems, which are
usually covered in the sophomore year of most engineering curricula, and with
elementary probability. Freshman courses in physics, chemistry, and calculus
are also assumed.
As with the ﬁrst edition, the book is organized into parts emphasizing
key overall conceptual divisions. Part I introduces basic imaging principles,
including an introduction to medical imaging systems in Chapter 1, a review
of signal processing (with emphasis on two-dimensional signals) in Chapter 2,
and a discussion of image quality in Chapter 3. Our presentation of the theory
of medical imaging systems is strongly based on continuous signals; however, a
development of discrete signals is included to permit discussions on sampling and
implementation. Issues of image quality, including resolution, noise, contrast,
geometric distortion, and artifacts are described in a general context here, and
are revisited within each modality in subsequent chapters.
Part II describes key modalities in radiographic imaging. It begins in
Chapter 4 with a brief presentation of the physics of radiography, including
the generation and detection of ionizing radiation and its effect on the human
body. Chapter 5 describes projection radiography systems, including chest x-ray,
ﬂuoroscopy, and mammography systems. As in all subsequent chapters, cover-
age focuses on signals, including only enough physics and biology to motivate
the modality and provide a model for the analysis. Chapter 5 also presents the
mathematics of projection imaging, a very fundamental idea in medical imaging.
Chapter 6 covers x-ray computed tomography, expanding on the instrumen-
tation and mathematics of projection imaging and introducing the concept
of image reconstruction in medical imaging. Computed tomography produces
true tomograms (images of cross sections of the body) rather than projections
of the body.
Part III presents the physics and modalities of nuclear medicine imaging.
Chapter 7 describes the physics of nuclear medicine, focusing primarily on the
concept of radioactivity. The major modalities in nuclear medicine imaging are
described in Chapter 8, which covers planar scintigraphy, and Chapter 9, which
covers emission computed tomography.
xv