264 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
8.2.8 Solid State and Other New Cameras
While Anger scintillation cameras remain the dominant nuclear medicine imag-
ing device, newer detectors are rapidly appearing. Of these, the solid state
camera is fast becoming an important competitor to the Anger camera. Solid
state cameras use semiconductors as the detector. Of note, semiconductors
directly produce current when gamma photons deposit energy in them, and thus
a semiconductor detector combines the functions of the crystal and PMTs. The
most commonly used semiconductor is cadmium-zinc-telluride (usually abbrevi-
ated as CZT); CZT has better energy resolution and count-rate capability than
typical scintillation detectors. The basic signal in a semiconductor detector is pro-
duced by electron-hole pairscreated along the path as radiation passes through
the detector and produces ionization. Each electron-hole pair is somewhat anal-
ogous to an ion pair. The motion of electron-hole pairs in an applied electric ﬁeld
generates the electrical signal. In many cases, the semiconductor is pixelated,
meaning that it is partially cut (in the thickness direction) into an array of 1 to
3 mm pixels. This pixelation facilitates the algorithms used for event positioning.
A hybrid approach between a conventional scintillation detector with PMTs
and a semiconductor detector is the use of a scintillation crystal (typically,
pixelated cesium iodide instead of continuous sodium iodide) with photodiodes
instead of photomultiplier tubes. This is essentially the same approach as
discussed in Section 6.2.4 for CT. While such systems are not ‘‘solid state’’ in the
same way as a semiconductor, they are often labeled this way in the marketplace.
Whether a continuous or pixelated detector is used and whether the detection
system is solid state, the general approach to image formation described below
is equally valid.
Despite these advances, the conventional gamma camera remains the
‘‘workhorse’’ of nuclear imaging. This is because its performance-to-cost ratio is
very high, particularly at larger ﬁelds of view—for example, for general purpose
and SPECT imaging.
8.3 Image Formation
The primary mechanism for creating images in planar scintigraphy is to detect
and estimate the position of individual scintillation events on the face of an
Anger camera. We now describe how the locations of these events are estimated,
how these locations are combined to produce images, and what these images
represent mathematically in terms of the distribution of radioactivity in the body.
8.3.1 Event Position Estimation
A single scintillation event produces a ﬂash of light that yields a response from
many, if not all, PMTs attached to the Anger camera. The amplitude or height of
each tube’s response is proportional to its distance from the scintillation event,
and this is how the position (X, Y) of the scintillation event is encoded. We start
our discussion of event position estimation with a general mathematical frame-
work and then specialize the presentation to both analog and digital cameras.
Consider a coordinate system with the origin (0, 0) at the center of the
crystal. Let the PMTs be indexed by k = 1, ... , K, and their positions be given