228 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
6.20 Find the SNR of the CT reconstruction of a lesion immersed in a 20-cm
(diameter) cylinder of water whose attenuation coefﬁcient is 5% different
than that of the water. A scanned source is used providing 100 projections
at 0.1 R (roentgen) per projection. The detector and beam dimensions
are 2.0 × 2.0 mm. Make appropriate assumptions about the reconstruc-
tion ﬁlter. Assume
μ = 0.15 cm −1 and that the detectors are touching
each other. Also assume that there are 2 .5 × 1010 photons/cm2 per
roentgen.
6.21 Joe is designing a new CT scanner. It will be a fan-beam design, with one
source and D detectors. He will use M angles, reconstruct images with N
by N pixels, and strictly enforce the design rule of thumb D = M = N.
The width of each detector d will be selected to be as large as possible
in order to completely ﬁll a 1 meter detector array with D detectors. The
reconstruction ramp ﬁlter will be designed using a rectangular window
with bandwidth ϱ 0 = 1/d.
(a) Joe requires that a lesion with contrast C = 0.005 embedded in water
(μ = 0.15 cm−1) will have a SNR of at least 20 dB. SupposeD = M =
N = 300. What is the minimum number of photons per projection at
the detectors that is required in order to meet this SNR constraint.
(b) Assume the patient has 0.125 m2 cross-sectional area (lying completely
in each fan beam). Assume that the patient is exposed to 1 roentgen
when 2.5 × 1010 photons pass through 1 cm 2 of tissue, and assume
that the dose to the patient in rads is equal to the exposure in roentgens.
What is the largestD(= M = N) that can be selected which will satisfy
the SNR requirement of part (a) and will keep the total dose for
the entire cross-sectional scan less than or equal to 2 rads. (Neglect
attenuation due to the patient and assume the detectors have 100%
efﬁciency.)
6.22 Your problem is to determine the number of detectors D to ﬁt into an
array of ﬁxed length L in order to optimize the SNR of a third-generation
CT scanner.
(a) Assume the approximate ramp ﬁlter is ˜c(ℓ) = F
−1{|ϱ |W(ϱ )}, where
W(ϱ ) is a rectangular window with (single-sided) bandwidth ϱ 0.
Assume that ϱ 0 = min{d−1, ϱ max}, where d is the width of a detector
and ϱ max is a ﬁxed constant. Assume that the number of projectionsM
is given by 1.5D. Find an expression for the SNR as a function of D.
(b) To avoid aliasing a J × J pixel reconstructed image it is decided to
choose ϱ max = J/(2L). We also restrict the number of detectors to lie
in the range 1 ≤ D ≤ J. What D gives the best SNR?
6.23 Suppose we have a ﬁrst-generation CT scanner with a mechanical problem.
For each projection angle, it measures zero at ℓ = 0. Now we use the
scanner to image a uniform disk.
(a) Sketch the sinogram.
(b) What would the reconstructed image look like?
(c) If instead the scanner always zeroes the measurement at ℓ = ℓ0, what
would the reconstructed image look like?