6.4 Image Quality in CT 221
Since ϱ 0 = 1/d, T = d = 0.25 cm, and D = M, we have
Pp = 2π2
3
1
0.252
1
σ2μ
= 1.87 × 1010 minimum .
6.4.3 Artifacts
This section identiﬁes and brieﬂy explains some of the artifacts that can appear
in CT images. Several of these are depicted in Figure 3.15.
Aliasing The projections will be aliased if they are undersampled. The effect on
a projection is that higher frequency information will appear as lower frequency
artifacts, as discussed in Section 3.6. These artifacts will continue through the
process of reconstruction (CBP, Fourier method, etc.), and appear as artifacts
in the image. The most readily apparent of these artifacts are streak artifacts
which appear to emanate, in particular, from small bright objects within the
image. An insufﬁcient number of projections also causes aliasing. These artifacts
also appear in the reconstructed images, often as streaks emanating from object
boundaries at points which have small radii of curvature. These streaks may be
either dark or bright, depending on the precise location of the objects and edges
within the ﬁeld-of-view.
Aliasing may be eliminated by sampling at a high enough (spatial sampling)
rate, assuming the object is band limited, or by low-pass ﬁltering prior to
sampling. Both of these goals are achieved to some degree in current clinical
scanners. High sampling rates are achieved by providing numerous detectors
within the fan-beam and by sampling at numerous angles. Ultimately, the
number of detectors is limited by physical size, efﬁciency, and the fact that
smaller detectors receive fewer photons and, hence, have higher measurement
variance. The number of angles is limited by storage capacity time (both to
scan and reconstruct), and dose. Low-pass ﬁltering (along each projection) is
achieved by the physical aperture of each detector, which acts as a boxcar ﬁlter.
There is no effective low-pass ﬁltering in angle.
Another potential source for artifacts is in the backprojection-summation
process, which must supply ﬁltered projection values for a ﬁnite set of points
(x
i, yj) (pixels) in the plane. The critical issues are how many pixels will be used
over the ﬁeld-of-view and what will be the method of interpolation. Too few,
and we produce an aliased version of the correct image, showing moir´e patterns
that appear as a structured textures that do not really exist. For such a coarse
image, the projections should be low-pass ﬁltered before backprojection.
A general rule of thumb for designing CT systems is that the number of
detectors should be approximately equal to the number of projections that
should be approximately equal to the number of points on the side of a
reconstructed image. A typical 3G system has around 700 detectors, acquires
1,000 projections, and reconstructs a 512 × 512 image.
Beam Hardening Beam hardening is caused by energy-selective attenuation
of the x-rays, as discussed in Section 5.2.2, and refers to the phenomenon