314 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
processes. In both SPECT and PET, it is possible to model these physical
processes in an attempt to reﬂect reality. Given these accurate, and elaborate,
imaging models, a number of algorithms have been developed to produce better
reconstructions than CBP. Broadly speaking, these algorithms fall into a class of
algorithms called iterative reconstruction algorithms.
In an iterative reconstruction algorithm, an initial ‘‘guess’’ of the distri-
bution of radioactivity is made, quite frequently by using CBP. Let us denote
this initial guess by f
(0)(x, y). If this were the true activity concentration in
the body (or sample), then we should expect to see speciﬁc projection values
as a result, say g0(ℓ, θ). These expected measurements can be computed given
a description of the imaging geometry and instrumentation, for example, our
imaging equation (9.20) with (9.23). Computing the expected measurements
given a source object is called solving the forward problem or forward pro-
jection. This new ‘‘forward-estimated’’ sinogram can now be compared with
the measured sinogram g(ℓ, θ). If the acquisition and reconstruction process
is correctly modeled, and if the initial guess were correct, then these sino-
grams would match. Otherwise, it is assumed that there are errors in the
initial guess and that it should be modiﬁed, yielding a second guess f
(1)(x, y).
This concept of iteratively improved object estimates is the essence of iterative
reconstruction.
There are many different iterative reconstruction algorithms that have been
developed and put into practice over the years. They differ primarily in how
they modify the estimated distribution in response to differences between the
estimated and observed projection values. Regardless of the details, in the end
each algorithm produces a sequence of estimated cross sections, f
(i)(x, y), i =
0, 1, 2,... , the ﬁnal one of which (after some iteration stopping rule is satisﬁed)
is the reconstruction that is used clinically. In essence, iterative reconstruction is
based on successive estimates, with each successive estimate yielding a forward-
estimated sinogram that is closer to the measured sinogram. We now present
a very basic algorithm, called the Algebraic Reconstruction Technique (ART),
which uses the Kaczmarz method for solving matrix equations, to illustrate this
concept.
Algebraic Reconstruction Technique (ART) Suppose the activity concentration
(object) is represented by pixel values fj, j = 1, ... , m. Assuming that pj(x, y)
j = 1, ... , m are indicator functions describing each pixel location and shape,
then the object can be represented by
f (x, y) =
m∑
j=1
fjpj(x, y) . (9.28)
Now we ask what will be the observations given just the radioactivity in pixelj?
To ﬁnd the answer we only need to substitute fjpj(x, y)a s f (x, y) into (9.6) and
(9.8) for SPECT or (9.20) and (9.23) for PET to determine determine g(ℓ, θ)f o r
this source. For a particular lineL(ℓi, θi), the observation can be writtengi = aijfj,
where aij represents the response to a unit activity concentration located in pixel
j. If there is activity in more than one pixel, then each pixel will contribute by