198 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
6.3.2 CT Numbers
A CT scanner reconstructs the value of μ at each pixel within a cross section,
using a process that we will describe in detail in the following sections. Different
CT scanners, however, have different x-ray tubes, which in turn have different
effective energies. Thus, the exact same object will produce different numerical
values of μ on different scanners. Worse, since the x-ray tube on a busy CT
scanner may need to be replaced about once every year, the same CT scanner
will produce a different scan of the same object in successive years. This is
clearly not a desirable situation.
In order to compare data from different scanners, which may have different
x-ray sources and hence different effective energies, CT numbers are computed
from the measured linear attenuation coefﬁcients at each pixel. The CT number
is deﬁned as
h = 1, 000× μ − μ
water
μwater
, (6.5)
and is expressed in Hounsﬁeld units (HU). Clearly,h = 0 HU for water, and since
μ = 0 in air, we ﬁnd thath =− 1, 000 HU for air. The largest CT numbers typi-
cally found naturally in the body are for bone, whereh ≈ 1, 000 HU for average
bone, although CT numbers can surpass h ≈ 3, 000 HU for metal and contrast
agents. Usually, CT numbers are rounded or truncated to the nearest integer; they
are typically reproducible to about ±2 HU between scans and across scanners.
6.3.3 Parallel-Ray Reconstruction
We have learned that the basic CT measurement is a line integral of the effective
linear attenuation coefﬁcient within a cross section. But line integrals are not
what we desire; we really want a picture of μ, or equivalently its CT number h,
over the entire cross section. Therefore, the important question is this: Can we
reconstruct a picture of μ given a collection of its line integrals? The answer is
‘‘yes,’’ and in this section we explore the theory and practice of reconstruction
from projections for parallel-ray geometry.
Geometry Let x and y be rectilinear coordinates in the plane. A line in the
plane is given by
L(ℓ, θ) ={ (x, y)|x cos θ + y sin θ = ℓ} , (6.6)
where ℓ is the lateral position of the line and θ is the angle of a unit normal to
the line, as ﬁrst introduced in (2.10) and shown in Figure 6.7. The line integral
of function f (x, y) is given by
g(ℓ, θ) =
∫ ∞
−∞
f (x(s), y(s)) ds , (6.7)
where
x(s) = ℓ cos θ − s sin θ , (6.8)
y(s) = ℓ sin θ + s cos θ. (6.9)