322 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
or cameras; PET utilizes a dedicated imaging system containing a ring or multi-
ple rings of detectors. In this chapter, we presented the following key concepts
that you should now understand:
1. Emission computed tomographyincludes single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography(PET).
2. SPECT is based on an ensemble of projection images, each of which is
usually a conventional planar scintigram.
3. PET has no projection analog and is based on coincidence detection of
paired gamma rays (‘‘annihilation photons’’) following positron-electron
annihilation.
4. SPECT is typically performed with rotating Anger scintillation cameras (with
multicamera systems being the most common); specialized geometry systems
now exist for enhanced sensitivity, especially for cardiac imaging.
5. PET is always performed with a dedicated PET scanner; such scanners are
always multislice and typically operate in 3-D mode.
6. Multimodality SPECT and PET systems are common; these systems incor-
porate CT (or MRI) to facilitate anatomic localization and attenuation
correction.
7. The basic SPECT imaging equationis, in essence, identical to that in planar
scintigraphy, except for a change in notation that facilitates consideration
of reconstruction; reconstruction can follow the approach outlined for CT.
8. The activity and attenuation terms in the basic SPECT imaging equationare
not separable; thus, there is no closed-form analytic solution for attenuation
correction in SPECT.
9. The basic PET imaging equation is similar to that for SPECT, with one
important difference: the use of coincidence detection leads to an attenuation
term whose limits of integration span the entire body; thus, PET has a
closed-form solution for attenuation correction.
10. Iterative reconstruction is a newer, more computer-intensive approach that
implicitly takes the random nature of decay into account and can incorporate
models of attenuation, scatter, and blur.
11. Image qualityin SPECT and PET is limited byresolution, scatter, and noise.
Further Reading
Bendriem, B. and Townsend, D.W. The Theory and
Practice of 3D PET, Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998.
Cherry, S.R., Sorenson, J.A., and Phelps, M.E.
Physics in Nuclear Medicine, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, PA: W. B. Saunders, 2012.
Christian, P.E. and Waterstram-Rich, K.M.Nuclear
Medicine and PET/CT: Technology and Tech-
niques, 7th ed., New York, NY: Elsevier/
Mosby, 2012.
Hudson, H.M. and Larkin, R.S. ‘‘Accelerated
Image Reconstruction Using Ordered Subsets of
Projection Data,’’ IEEE Transactions on Medi-
cal Imaging, 13(4):601–609, 1994.
Shepp, L.A. and Vardi, Y. ‘‘Maximum Likeli-
hood Reconstruction for Emission Tomogra-
phy,’’ IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging,
MI-1(2):113–122, 1982.