298 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
registered SPECT or PET and CT slices are obtained, and the emission images
can be superimposed on the CT slices (with the emission activity typically
depicted in color, and the CT in shades of gray). This type of display makes it
much easier to determine the anatomic location of any increased (or decreased)
area of activity.
The ﬁrst combined SPECT/CT systems used low-output x-ray tubes, pro-
ducing CT images of relatively poor quality (i.e., limited spatial resolution and
higher noise than conventional diagnostic CT images); they were not considered
usable for diagnosis, only for anatomic localization. Most current-generation
SPECT/CT systems use high-output tubes and produce CT images of routine
diagnostic quality.
Of importance, the CT images can also be used to help determine the
attenuation experienced by the photons emitted from the radiotracer; this
attenuation effect, which confounds the measurement of activity, is intrinsic to
SPECT imaging [see (9.2) and (9.6)]. The CT images provide a transmission
dataset for use in reconstruction, as described in Section 9.2.1 below.
9.1.2 PET Instrumentation
Positron emitting radionuclides are used in PET; the radiopharmaceuticals make
PET a functional imaging technique and in the family of nuclear medicine
modalities. A typical PET system is shown in Figure 9.3. From the outside, we
only see the plastic housing, and a PET system looks just like a CT or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) system, but the hardware is quite different in PET.
Consider a positron-emitting radiopharmaceutical distributed in a patient
and refer to Figure 9.4 for the following discussion. When a positron is emitted,
it travels up to several millimeters in tissue depositing its kinetic energy. It then
meets a free electron in the tissue, and mutual annihilation occurs (recall that a
positron is an antielectron). From conservation of energy—noting that 511 keV
is the energy equivalent to the rest mass of an electron or positron—two 511 keV
annihilation (gamma ray) photons appear. From conservation of momentum,
the two 511 keV photons are emitted back-to-back; that is, they propagate
outward from the site of annihilation (almost exactly) 180
◦ apart.
Figure 9.3
A PET system. Courtesy
of GE Healthcare.
