128 Chapter 4 Physics of Radiography
The term exposure, which is given the symbolX, refers to the number of ion
pairs produced in a speciﬁc volume of air by EM radiation. The International
System unit for exposure is coulombs per kilogram of air (C/kg); however,
a more useful unit in medical imaging is the roentgen (R), which equals
2.58 × 10
−4 C/kg. The conversion between the two is 1 C/kg = 3,876 R.
EXAMPLE 4.6
For a point source of radiation, the exposure at a distance d from the source follows an
inverse square law.
Question If the exposure atd = 30 cm from a point source is 1 R, what is the exposure
at d = 5 cm from the source?
Answer The exposure at d = 5 cm is 36 ((30 /5)2 = 36) times that at d = 30 cm. So
the exposure at d = 5c mi s X5 = 36X30 = 36 R.
4.6.2 Dose and Kerma
As ionizing EM radiation passes through a material, it deposits energy into
the material by both the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering. This is
the concept of dose. The unit ofabsorbed doseis the rad, which is deﬁned as the
absorption of 100 ergs per gram of material. It is given the symbol D. Notice
that this unit refers to an energy-deposition concentration rather than a total
amount of energy. The SI unit for absorbed dose is thegray (Gy); 1 Gy = 1J / k g
= 100 rads. For the degree of accuracy required in biomedical dosimetry, one
roentgen of exposure yields one rad of absorbed dose in soft tissue.
There is a another quantity closely related to dose, called kerma, which is
given the symbol K. Kerma is deﬁned as the amount of energy per unit mass
imparted directly to the electrons in a given material. It is also measured in units
of gray (Gy). As a practical matter, at diagnostic x-ray energies, kerma and
dose are essentially equivalent. When kerma is being used in air for calibration
purposes, it is referred to as air kermaand is given the symbol K
air.
4.6.3 Linear Energy Transfer (LET)
The linear energy transfer is a measure of the energy transferred by radiation
to the material through which it is passing per unit length; higher LET radiation
tends to produce greater adverse biological consequences. Speciﬁc ionization
(SI) is the number of ion pairs formed per unit length. LET and SI are related
to each other by the average amount of energy required to form one ion pair
(often referred to as W), which is a characteristic of the material.
4.6.4 The f -Factor
It is often useful to be able to measure exposure but to express the results as
dose to an individual in that radiation ﬁeld. Because of the way in which the
roentgen and rad are deﬁned, a relationship between exposure in air and dose