270 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
given by the number of radioactive atoms per unit volume. From (7.4), we
see that multiplying this quantity by the radioactive decay constant λ gives
the radioactivity per unit volume. It is customary in nuclear medicine to view
this quantity, the radiotracer activity concentration function, denoted here by
f (x, y, z) and having, for example, units of Bq/m 3, as the fundamental quantity
that is observed. Given this deﬁnition, the radioactivity within a differential
volume element dxdydz is given by
dA(x, y, z) = f (x, y, z)dxdydz . (8.4)
A gamma camera counts individual photons hitting the detector, so unlike CT
where intensity I is the appropriate raw measurement, in nuclear medicine the
photon ﬂuence rate φ [see (4.14)] is the correct raw measurement. Accordingly,
incorporating both the inverse square law and attenuation along the path the
differential photon ﬂuence rate dφ(x
d, yd) at the detector position (xd, yd, 0) due
to the differential source at (x, y, z)i s
dφ(xd, yd) = dA
4πr2 exp
{
−
∫ r
0
μ(s;E) ds
}
. (8.5)
Here it is assumed that the origin ( s = 0) of the line is at the point ( x, y, z) and
the end point of the line is at ( xd, yd, 0), which means that the total distance a
photon travels from the source to the target is
r =
√
(x − xd)2 + (y − yd)2 + z2 .
In order to ﬁnd the total photon ﬂuence rate, we must integrate over all
differential radioactivity elements that are physically able to contribute to the
ﬂuence at ( xd, yd, 0) on the detector. This implies that the collimator must be
considered since it is designed to restrict the view of the detector face.
For simplicity, we restrict our attention to a parallel-hole collimator and
consider the response at a detector point residing above (and within the projec-
tion of) a hole (see Figure 8.9). We further simplify our analysis by assuming
that the only part of the object that is ‘‘seen’’ by this point is formed by a
cylindrical tube created by extending the collimator hole along the z-axis into
the object. Then the desired integral is given by
φ(xd, yd) =
∫∫∫
Tube
f (x, y, z)
4πr2 exp
{
−
∫ r
0
μ(s;E) ds
}
dx dy dz. (8.6)
This integral can be worked out in principle, but it suits our purpose better—in
order to get at the essence of the situation—to make additional approxima-
tions to achieve further simpliﬁcation. First, we assume that both the activity
concentration f (x, y, z) and linear attenuation coefﬁcient μ(x, y, z) are constant
within the tube at any given depth z. Second, we assume that r ≈| z| for any
differential radioactive element within the same tube. These assumptions allow
us to substantially simplify the volume integral, yielding
φ(xd, yd) = Ah
∫ 0
−∞
f (xd, yd, z)
4πz2 exp
{
−
∫ 0
z
μ(xd, yd, z′;E) dz′
}
dz , (8.7)