4.4 Nature and Properties of Ionizing Radiation 115
or ionizing the atom, and temporarily leaving a hole in that shell. (This can also
happen to higher-orbit electrons but is not signiﬁcant in imaging.) The K-shell
hole is then ﬁlled by an electron from the L-shell, M-shell, or N-shell. Since the
electron binding energy of the K-shell is higher than that of the L-, M-, or N-
shell, there is aloss of energy as the electron ﬁlls the K-shell hole or vacancy. The
loss of energy experienced by the outer-shell electron creates an EM photon.
The x-ray is called a characteristic x-ray. The energy of the characteristic
x-ray photon is exactly equal to the difference in electron binding energies
between the two shells. In fact, the particular electron ‘‘subshells,’’ which have
slightly different energies according to quantum physics, are distinguished. Since
these electron binding energies are determined by the particular atom and those
transitions allowed by quantum physics, these x-ray energies are ‘‘characteristic’’
of particular atoms, which is the reason for the name characteristic x-rays.A
given atom can be identiﬁed by the nature (energies and proportions) of the
characteristic x-rays it generates.
Bremsstrahlung radiation is caused by the interaction of an energetic elec-
tron with the nucleus of an atom, as shown in Figure 4.4(c). As the electron
approaches the nucleus, the positive charge of the nucleus attracts the electron,
causing it to bend, as if to go into orbit around the nucleus. As the electron
decelerates around the nucleus, it loses energy in the form of an EM photon,
which comprises bremsstrahlung radiation (German for ‘‘braking radiation’’).
Unless the electron actually strikes the nucleus, the electron departs the atom
with a kinetic energy reduced by the energy of the emitted photon. In the
rare event of a collision with the nucleus, the electron is annihilated, and the
photon emitted has energy equal to the kinetic energy of the incident electron.
Otherwise, the emitted photon must have energy lower than that of the incident
electron. The intensity of bremsstrahlung radiation increases with the energy of
the incident electron and the atomic number of the atom with which it interacts.
As discussed in Chapter 5, bremsstrahlung radiation is the primary source
of x-rays from an x-ray tube. This is because an x-ray tube works by accelerating
electrons across a voltage potential in a vacuum. When the electrons strike the
target or anode, which is usually tungsten, they lose energy by both collisional
and radiative transfer; so heat, characteristic x-rays, and bremsstrahlung x-
rays are produced. The x-ray energies produced by the characteristic and
bremsstrahlung interactions differ in character, as shown in Figure 4.5. The
bremsstrahlung spectrum, sometimes called the continuous spectrum, has its
highest energy equal to the anode-to-cathode potential. In this ﬁgure, different
potentials are considered: 45 kV, 61 kV, 80 kV, 100 kV, and 120 kV. For a
given ﬁxed potential, x-rays at the highest energies are produced only by the rare
direct collisions between energetic electrons and anode nuclei. It is increasingly
more likely for lower energy bremsstrahlung interactions to take place; it is
approximately a linear increase with frequency decreasing from the maximum
energy. At the lower energies, bremsstrahlung radiation is still produced, but is
absorbed by the anode itself, so the spectrum goes to (effectively) zero.
Characteristic x-rays can be generated only if the incident electrons have
sufﬁcient energy to eject inner-shell electrons. For a tungsten anode, the K-shell
binding energy is 69.5 keV, the L-shell binding energy is approximately 12 keV,
and the M-shell binding energy is under 3 keV. Thus, the characteristic x-rays
from tungsten are all under 70 keV, and include energies of approximately