Introduction
CHAPTER
11
In this book, we take a signals and systems approach to the characterization of
medical imaging. As discussed in the Overview, there are a variety of signals in
which we are interested; ultimately, this interest stems from the biological and
medical signiﬁcance of these signals in patients with various diseases. In practice,
these signals are transformed into images via medical imaging modalities. In this
chapter, we begin to consider these modalities and their characteristics.
1.1 History of Medical Imaging
The ﬁrst published medical image was a radiograph of the hand of Wilhelm Con-
rad Roentgen’s wife in December 1895. Roentgen had been experimenting with
a Crooke’s tube (the forerunner of today’s x-ray tube) and noticed that ‘‘a new
kind of rays’’ (hence, x-rays) were emitted that could expose a photographic
plate even when optically shielded. It was immediately obvious to Roentgen that
his discovery could have a profound impact in medicine. Indeed, the ﬁrst clinical
use of x-rays occurred only two months later, in February 1896. The use of x-rays
became widespread, and both static and dynamic (ﬂuoroscopic) techniques were
developed. Here, a static technique refers to an image taken at a single point in
time, whereas adynamic technique refers to a series of images acquired over time.
For many decades, these planar (i.e., two-dimensional projection) radio-
graphs were the only medical images being produced. Ultimately, radiography
was extended into transmission computed tomography, orcross-sectional imag-
ing. Godfrey Hounsﬁeld produced the ﬁrst true computed tomography (CT)
scanner in 1972 at EMI in England. He used mathematical methods for image
reconstruction developed a decade earlier by Allan Cormack of the United
States. Hounsﬁeld and Cormack shared the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1979.
Many radiologists consider CT scanning to be the most important development
in medical imaging since Roentgen’s original discovery.
As radiography arose from the discovery of x-rays, nuclear medicine arose
from the discovery of radioactivity by Antoine Henri Becquerrel in 1896.
Initially, radionuclides were used in cancer therapy rather than in medical
5