9.4 Summary and Key Concepts 321
our consideration of contrast followed that ﬁrst introduced in (3.1), and recast
speciﬁcally for planar imaging in (8.25). In SPECT and PET, the deﬁnition of
contrast remains the same, butf
max and fmin are from reconstructed images. The
deﬁnition of local contrast also remains the same, with the values of foreground
intensity and background intensity taken from the reconstructed images at the
appropriate locations.
9.3.5 Noise and Signal-to-Noise Ratio
It is important to remember that deterministic effects inﬂuence only the signal
component of an image’s signal-to-noise ratio; in other words, they inﬂuence
only quantitative accuracy. Noise arises from the random statistical nature
of radioactive decay, as well as potentially from the imaging hardware and
certain image processing operations, and inﬂuences the noise component of
the SNR; in other words, it inﬂuences precision. The noise in projection data
in SPECT and PET is identical to the situation in planar scintigraphy and
follows the development given in Section 8.4.5. However, the reconstruction
process changes the noise magnitude and correlation in a fashion similar to
the way that reconstruction changes the noise in CT compared with projection
radiography.
In practice, estimating the noise in a reconstructed SPECT or PET image
is difﬁcult. In order to present a generic formulation, we make the same
assumptions we made to derive an expression for variance in CT: The measured
line integrals are statistically independent, and the object is sufﬁciently uniform
that the line integrals are essentially equal. With these simplifying assumptions,
the derivation of the variance in a reconstructed SPECT or PET image is identical
to that presented in Section 6.4.2, is independent of (x, y) location, and is given
by (6.72).
In PET, a powerful concept called noise equivalent count rate (NEC) has
been developed to reﬂect these concepts and include PET-speciﬁc issues (such as
random coincidences). The NEC is given by:
NEC = T
2
T + S + 2R , (9.41)
where T is the true coincidence count rate,S is the scatter count rate, andR is the
random coincidence count rate. NEC can be thought of as the equivalent true
count rate of an ideal system (i.e., one with no scatter or random coincidences)
that results in the same SNR as an actual system with given scatter and random
coincidence count rates.
Ultimately, key performance parameters such as lesion detectability or
quantitative accuracy and precision depend on the signal-to-noise ratio and
total error. Since both contrast and noise are deﬁned the same way in CT and
SPECT/PET, the SNR formulation presented for CT in (6.73) applies, and the
ﬁnal SNR formulation is the same as (6.74).
9.4 Summary and Key Concepts
Cross-sectional—i.e., tomographic—imaging in nuclear medicine is accom-
plished with SPECT and PET. SPECT usually utilizes a rotating Anger camera