5.4 Noise and Scattering 171
still relatively transparent to x-rays, and the number of photons per Roentgen
is high.
We can express the SNR in more detail by adding several additional
concepts. Since we indicated above that SNR is proportional to the number of
photons per unit area of detector, if we increase the unit area we also increase
the number of photons. Therefore, a detailed expression for SNR is given by
SNR = C
√
/Phi1ARtη , (5.39)
where /Phi1is the number of photons per Roentgen per cm 2, A is the unit area,
R is the body’s radiation exposure in Roentgens, t is the fraction of photons
transmitted through the body, and η is the detector efﬁciency.
EXAMPLE 5.5
Consider the following parameters, which are from a typical chest x-ray:
/Phi1= 637 × 106 photons R−1 cm−2
R = 50 mR
t = 0.05
η = 0.25 (25% efﬁciency)
A = 1m m2
Question What is the SNR of a lesion having 10% contrast, that is, C = 0.1?
Answer Using (5.39), we compute that SNR = 16 dB.
5.4.2 Quantum Efﬁciency and Detective Quantum Efﬁciency
In projection radiography, x-rays that are not stopped by the body should
be detected. Ideally, all photons incident upon a detector would be detected
and characterized by their location, energy, and time-of-arrival. However, no
detector can achieve these ideals. Instead, detector designs must emphasize
certain performance measures at the expense of others, and these tradeoffs
inﬂuence the quality of the measured radiographs. In this section, we develop
the concept of detective quantum efﬁciency (DQE), which represents one way
to characterize the performance of a detector that has a direct relation to the
SNR of the images it produces.
Quantum Efﬁciency Ideally, all photons incident upon a detector should be
detected. What does this really mean? In order to be ‘‘detected,’’ an incident
photon must interact with the detector—for example, it must be stopped by a
photoelectric interaction—and that interaction must produce some measurable
output—for example, a ﬂash of light, a collection of ionized atoms, or an
electrical current. Quantum efﬁciency (QE) is the probability that a single
photon incident upon the detector will be detected; it is a basic property of any
x-ray detector.
A detector with a higher QE does not necessarily mean that the detector
or the image it produces is better, however. Consider two detectors having the