Problems 289
(a) Find the collimator resolution at the given range.
(b) Suppose the intrinsic resolution of the Anger camera is 0.2 mm. Write
an expression for the overall PSF of the Anger camera at the given
range, assuming both hC and hI are Gaussian.
Photons sometimes penetrate the collimator’s septa, which means that
a photon entering one collimator hole can sometimes be detected under
another hole, as shown in Figure P8.6.
Figure P8.6
Septal penetration by a
photon. See Problem
8.16.
Primary hole Adjacent hole
Photon
w
In parts (c), (d), and (e), we consider the effect of septal penetration on
collimator design and collimator resolution. Assume the linear attenuation
coefﬁcient for lead is μ.
(c) Assume a photon enters one hole, penetrates an adjacent septum and
is detected in the adjacent hole. What is the minimum length w of the
path through the septum as shown in the ﬁgure? (The result should
be in units of mm.)
(d) Suppose we desire septal thickness to be large enough to stop 95%
of the photons that pass through the minimum distance w. For ﬁxed
l and d, what inequality should h satisfy?
(e) How does septal penetration inﬂuence collimator resolution?
(f) Can we use the acceptance window to reject photons that penetrate
septa and are detected in adjacent holes? Explain.
(g) A photon can be rejected if its Z-pulse is too small. What physical
event(s) could cause this low Z-pulse?
8.17 Assume a 2-D scenario in which a pellet ﬁlled with radiotracer is located
at the origin. The pellet emits gamma rays in the x-y plane and its
radioactivity is A = 0.54 mCi as shown in Figure P8.7(a). The detector is
made of a material with μ = 0.64 cm−1 and thickness of b = 2c m .
(a) What is the average rate of photons per second hitting the detector (in
photons per second)?
(b) Find the efﬁciency of the detector at its center (that is, at x = 0).
A parallel hole collimator with septal thickness h = 2.5 mm, septal height
l = 8 cm, and hole diameter d = 5 mm is added onto the detector, as
shown in Figure P8.7(b).
(c) What is the collimator resolution RC?
(d) Assume the intrinsic resolution of the detector is 1 mm. What is the
overall PSF of the camera knowing that both hC and hI are Gaussian?
(e) Given the geometry, how many holes receive radiation that can hit
the detector?