5.2 Instrumentation 143
Figure 5.8
Linear attenuation
coefﬁcients of bone,
muscle, fat, and two
contrast agents. (Adapted
from Johns and
Cunningham, 1983.)
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 100 150 200150.1
1.0
10
100
Linear attenuation coefficient(cm/H110021)
Photon energy (keV)
Hypaque
Kedge
37.4
Kedge
33.2
Muscle
Soft tissue
Bone
Fat
BaSO4
Mix
soluble compounds that are safely introduced into the body through intravascu-
lar injection or ingestion. Iodinated contrast compounds are used for enhancing
the appearance of blood vessels, heart chambers, tumors, infections, and other
abnormalities on x-ray images (projection radiography as well as computed
tomography (CT) scans). Because these iodine compounds are concentrated
by the kidney and excreted into the urine, they are also used for diagnosing
problems of the kidneys and bladder using x-ray imaging.
Barium is used exclusively to enhance contrast within the gastrointestinal
tract. It is typically administered as a chalky ‘‘milkshake,’’ which passes through
the gastrointestinal tract without being absorbed or altering the basic function of
the stomach and bowel. Barium is the standard agent for enhancing the contrast
of the stomach and small and large bowel in conjunction with projection
radiography studies.
Air itself can also be used as a contrast agent. Because it does not readily
absorb x-rays, it is used as an ‘‘opposite’’ type of contrast to that of iodine and
barium. For example, by inﬂating the lungs, air provides contrast for the lung
tissue. Air is also used with barium to provide a double contrast between regions
of the bowel containing barium and those containing air.
5.2.4 Grids, Airgaps, and Scanning Slits
X-ray photons that are not absorbed or scattered arrive at the detector from
along a line segment originating at the x-ray source (anode of the x-ray tube).
However, if an x-ray photon is scattered and still manages to hit the detector,
its point of origin will not intersect the x-ray source (unless a highly unlikely
multiple scattering sequence occurs). Since scattering is a random phenomenon,
this process will cause a random ‘‘fog’’ throughout the image if left uncorrected,
thereby reducing the contrast of the direct image (see Section 5.4.3).