8.2 Instrumentation 261
a line drawn through its direction of ﬂight will not intersect its site of origin
but instead the site of the Compton interaction. Thus, photons scattered into
the ﬁeld of view could be falsely attributed to activity at the sites of Compton
interactions in the patient. It is clearly not desirable to have these scattered
photons contribute to the ﬁnal image, as they signiﬁcantly degrade resolution
and contrast. It is important to note that a large percentage of photons striking
the crystal have been scattered in the patient.
Fortunately, photons that have been Compton scattered can be distin-
guished from those that arrive directly by analyzing the energy deposited in
the crystal via the Z-pulse, whose height is proportional to the total energy
deposited in the crystal. In practice, we know the energy of gamma photons
emitted from the radioactive source since we choose the radionuclide to use
in a given imaging session and we understand its radioactive decay properties.
If this amount of energy is deposited in the crystal, the gamma photon could
not have Compton scattered in the patient since it would have lost some of
its energy in the process [as determined in (4.8)]. Of course, a gamma photon
could emerge from the patient with all its energy (i.e., without having interacted
in the patient) and only deposit part of its energy in the crystal (via a Compton
scattering interaction). We cannot distinguish between this event and one in
which the gamma photon Compton scattered in the patient and then deposited
all its remaining energy in the crystal via a subsequent photoelectric event. In
practice, we can only be certain that the gamma photon has not scattered if it
deposits in the crystal the full amount of energy with which it was emitted, and
these are the only events we allow to contribute to image formation.
Scintillation spectrometry, or pulse height analysis, refers to the use of a
scintillation counting system to obtain an energy spectrum from a radioactive
source. This energy spectrum is a plot of the number of pulses with a given
pulse height as a function of the pulse height, as illustrated in Figure 8.5(a). The
measured spectrum is a function of the energies of gamma rays emitted by the
source and the interactions of these photons in the source and any intervening
material (e.g., the body), and in the crystal. It should be noted that the pulse
heights on the x-axis generally have arbitrary units (AU), although they could
be scaled to units of energy (keV) if the camera were properly calibrated.
A pulse height spectrum, as shown in Figure 8.5(a), has two main features:
a broad plateau called the Compton plateau and a peak at the highest pulse
heights, which is called the photopeak. The broad plateau represents Compton
scatter interactions in the patient and/or crystal, broadly distributed in energy
Figure 8.5
Pulse height spectrum for
technetium-99m, plotting
number of pulses or count
rate as a function of pulse
height or energy.
102
103
104
105
Number of pulses
Compton
plateau
Compton
Edge
Photopeak
0 50 100 150 200 250
Pulse height, AU
(a)
102
103
104
105
Number of pulses
0 50 100 150 200 250
Pulse height, AU
(b)
Acceptance
windows