3.2 Contrast 55
Sometimes, medical images are blurry and lack detail. The ability of a
medical imaging system to depict details is known asresolution. High resolution
systems create images of high diagnostic quality. Low resolution systems create
images that lack ﬁne detail. For example, while the PET image in Figure I.4(c)
has higher contrast than the CT image in Figure I.4(a) or the MRI image in
Figure I.4(b), it has poorer spatial resolution.
A medical image may be corrupted by random ﬂuctuations in image intensity
that do not contribute to image quality. This is known as noise. The source,
amount, and type of noise depends on the particular imaging modality used.
Object visibility is often reduced by the presence of noise, because the noise
masks image features. Nuclear medicine images tend to have the highest noise,
as reﬂected in the PET image in Figure I.4(c).
Most medical imaging systems can create image features that do not rep-
resent a valid object within, or characteristic of, the patient. These features
are known as artifacts, and can frequently obscure important features or be
falsely interpreted as abnormal ﬁndings. Medical images should not only make
desired features visible but should also give an accurate impression of their
shape, size, position, and other geometric characteristics. Unfortunately, for
many reasons to be explained later in this book, medical imaging systems
frequently introduce distortion of these important factors. Distortion in med-
ical images should be corrected in order to improve the diagnostic quality of
these images.
Ultimately, the quality of medical images should be judged on their utility in
the context of a speciﬁc clinical application. For example, medical images that
increase the chance of tumor detectability in nuclear medicine should be prefer-
able to images with poor tumor detectability. Fundamentally, we are interested
in the accuracy of medical images in the context of a clinical application, where
‘‘accuracy’’ means both conformity to truth and clinical utility.
The user of a medical imaging system is very interested in adjusting the
system to produce images of the highest possible quality, while maintaining a
safe environment for the patient. In order to achieve this, methods must be
developed for evaluating image quality. Since image quality depends primarily
on the six previously discussed factors, we need to mathematically quantify these
factors and systematically study their inﬂuence on image quality. The purpose
of this chapter is to provide a fundamental exposition on contrast, resolution,
noise, artifacts, distortion, and accuracy. More detailed discussions on these
factors, and how they affect image quality for a speciﬁc imaging modality, will
be provided later.
3.2 Contrast
Contrast refers to differences between the image intensity of an object and
surrounding objects or background. This difference, or image contrast,i si t s e l f
the result of the inherent object contrast within the patient. In general, the goal
of a medical imaging system is to accurately portray or preserve the true object
contrast in the image. Particularly for detection of abnormalities, a medical
imaging system that produces high contrast images is preferable to a system