6.4 Image Quality in CT 219
We now interpret this expression for image noise variance with the following
observations:
• If we increase the bandwidth of the rectangular window, the image variance
also increases. This follows one’s natural intuition that noise has high
frequency components, while the image bandwidth tends to diminish at
high frequencies. We will see in emission tomography (Chapter 9) that the
design of windowing functions that optimally balance the increase in noise
contributions with the loss of image sharpness is very important.
• If we decrease T, the spacing between detectors, the variance decreases.
Notice, however, that if the size of each detector is forced to decrease in
order to do this, or if the detector efﬁciency decreases, then the decreased
spacing will be offset by a lower
N.
• If we increase N, the variance decreases. In general, one increases N0 to
do this. One could also increase N by increasing the incident x-ray energy,
which lowers the amount of x-ray absorption. However, one would then
have a loss of contrast, a subject that is considered in the following section
on SNR.
• If we increase M, the variance decreases. Thus, the more angles the better.
This assumes constant acquisition time per angle—it would not be true with
constant total scan time. (However, increasedM for constant total scan time
could still provide beneﬁts from improved angular sampling.)
• The fraction
N/T indicates the average number of photons per unit distance
along the detector array. In fan-beam geometries, we can increase this ratio,
and hence decrease the image variance, by increasing N
0.
Image SNR Image variance is an important concept when we are trying to
measure the linear attenuation coefﬁcient. However, in radiology we must also
consider the contrast between tissues, since this is what creates the visual effect
of objects or structures with boundaries in a medical image. Therefore, any
useful deﬁnition of SNR must contain both contrast and noise. We deﬁne SNR
here as
SNR = Cμ
σμ
, (6.73)
where C is the fractional change in μ from μ, μ is the mean linear attenuation
coefﬁcient, and σμ is the standard deviation of the measurement (the square root
of the variance). Equation (6.73) is thus the CT version of the differential SNR
introduced in (3.69). Combining (6.72) with (6.73) gives
SNR = Cμ
π ϱ −3/2
0
√
3
2(N/T)M . (6.74)
In a good CT scanner design, we set ϱ 0 ≈ k/d, where k ≈ 1 and d is the
width of a detector. This gives
SNR ≈ 0.4kCμd3/2
√
(N/T)M . (6.75)