268 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
each (accepted) scintillation event. Finally, if there are 400,000 accepted events,
then the sum of all the pixel values in the ﬁnal image will be 400,000—that is,
the total countsfor the scan.
Dynamic frame mode acquisition, as shown in Figure 8.7(c) is a temporal
succession of frame mode images. After the ﬁrst image is created and stored,
its buffer (matrix) is zeroed and another image is accumulated in identical
fashion. This mode allows the study of transient physiological processes such
as radiotracer uptake, washout, or redistribution. Movies of the temporal
progression of a dynamic process can be created by appending the frames and
replaying them after acquisition is complete. Generally, the number of pixels
in dynamic frame mode images is smaller in order to yield higher counts (and
correspondingly lower noise) in each pixel. [Increasing pixel size to reduce
noise has already been discussed in the context of projection radiography;
see (5.37).]
A further extension of frame mode acquisition is multiple-gated acquisition
(or MUGA), as depicted in Figure 8.7(d). In this mode, the data from the camera
are distributed to a series of matrices in computer memory. A trigger signal
(usually a physiological trigger such as the R wave of the ECG) controls the
distribution of data among the matrices. Immediately after the trigger, data from
the camera are placed in the ﬁrst matrix for a ﬁxed time interval. When the time
interval has elapsed, data are then placed in the second matrix for the same time
interval. This process continues until the occurrence of a new trigger signal, at
which time data distribution restarts at the ﬁrst frame, or until all the assigned
matrices in computer memory are used, in which case no data are acquired until
the occurrence of a new trigger signal.
Multiple-gated acquisition is used to study a repetitive (cyclic) dynamic pro-
cess. For example, in a cardiac-gated blood pool study, in which the circulating
blood is labeled with radioactive atoms and the beating chambers of the heart are
examined, the data from the corresponding phases of many heartbeats are super-
imposed during acquisition, resulting in a series of images representing one ‘‘aver-
age’’ cardiac cycle. Typically, the cardiac cycle is divided into 16–64 frames,
with each frame representing 1/16–1/64 of the cycle.
Whole-body acquisition is yet another variation of static frame mode
acquisition. In this mode, the body is divided into a matrix of pixels, as
depicted in Figure 8.7(e) and a series of static frames are acquired to cover the
body, in a ‘‘step and shoot’’ sequence. As an alternative, the camera or bed
can continuously move. The position of the patient relative to the camera is
maintained so that the camera can be scanned over the whole patient, thereby
creating a whole-body image.
The most common (2-D) matrix sizes used in nuclear medicine are 64× 64,
128 × 128, and 256× 256, although matrices up to 1,024× 1,024 are available.
The larger the matrix size, the better the digital spatial resolution in the image,
up to the limit imposed by the intrinsic capabilities of the camera. The digital
sampling requirements necessary to preserve the spatial resolution in the analog
image are given by the Nyquist theorem in Section 3.6. This theorem states
that, to accurately portray a signal, the sampling frequency must be twice the
highest frequency present in the signal. Thus, pixel dimensions should be smaller
than one-half of the spatial resolution of the Anger camera. In practice, pixel
dimensions range from 2 to 6 mm.