6.2 CT Instrumentation 193
beam strikes the tungsten anode; the resultant radiation is collimated into a fan-
beam, which passes through the patient and is detected on the other side by a
stationary ring of detectors, as in 4G CT systems. Since the anodes and detectors
are stationary, no moving parts are required, and this allows a full set of fan-beam
projection data to be acquired in about 50 milliseconds. EBCT is an expensive
design, but because of the extremely small scan-time it is the only commercially
available CT method that can capture stop-action images of a beating heart
without electrocardiographic (ECG) gating.
Sometimes considered the sixth-generation (6G) scanner,t h e helical CT
was developed in the late 1980s to address the need for rapid volumetric data
acquisition. Today, most of the CT scanners in the United States are capable of
helical CT. The reason is simple: With helical CT, a full 60-cm torso scan can
be obtained in about 30 seconds, a full 24-cm lung study in 12 seconds, and a
detailed 15-cm angiography study in 30 seconds. With these kinds of speeds,
motion artifacts can be reduced or eliminated (using breath-holds), and critically
ill patients can be scanned quickly. For entry-level scanners, the equipment may
cost about US$500,000 for a helical CT unit versus about US$350,000 for
a conventional CT unit. A top-of-the-line helical CT unit may reach the US
$1 million mark.
A helical CT scanner consists of a conventional arrangement of the x-ray
source and detectors (as in 3G and 4G systems) which can continuously rotate.
While the tube is rotating and acquiring projection data, the patient table is
set into motion, sliding the patient through the source–detector plane. It is
easy to see that with this geometry and movement, the position of the source
carves out a helix with respect to the patient. Continuous rotation of the
large mass comprising the x-ray source and detectors requires what is called
slip ring technology in order to communicate with the controlling stationary
hardware. In particular, power is provided using rings and brushes, while data
are passed using optical links. Rotation periods are typically 0.3 to 0.5 seconds
per revolution in modern scanners.
A seventh-generation (7G) scannerhas emerged with the advent ofmultiple-
row detector CT (MDCT) scanners. In these scanners, a ‘‘thick’’ fan-beam is
used, and multiple (axial) parallel rows of detectors are used to collect the x-rays
within this thick fan. (Some scanners have fan beams that are so thick they can
be thought of as cone beams.) Essentially, multiple (up to 320) 1-D projections
are collected at the same time using this geometry. This leads to more economical
use of the x-ray tube since less of the generated beam must be absorbed by lead
at the source. Also, provided that the x-ray tube and detectors are far enough
apart, the simultaneous data that are collected from the parallel rows of detectors
correspond approximately to parallel planes. This means that a ‘‘slab’’ of cross-
sectional images can be imaged simultaneously. When a multiple detector array
is combined with a helical scanner, the pitch of the helix can be larger, and full
3-D scans can be even faster.
The advent of helical and MDCT has made the requirement for new develop-
ments in data processing even more critical. In particular, while a conventional
CT might have reconstructed 40 slices over a region of interest, with helical CT
and MDCT a clinician might acquire 80–120 slices over the same region in less
time. Some extensive studies may comprise 500 slices—for example, a 50 cm
scan at 1 mm intervals might be used for imaging the colon. The burden is now
to medically interpret or ‘‘read’’ these slices, which takes time. A study was