212 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
think of the phrase convolution weighted-backprojection when the projections
are fan-beams.
6.3.5 Helical CT Reconstruction
Consider the helical CT scenario in which there is a single detector array and the
patient table is continuously moved through the gantry. In this case, the nature
of the acquired data is different than in single-slice CT. Since x-rays move at the
speed of light, any acquired projection still corresponds to a single plane within
the patient; however, because of the continuous movement of the patient, no two
projections will correspond to the same plane. A given (fan-beam) projection
is therefore identiﬁed uniquely by its longitudinal position z
j, measured relative
to the patient. The index j, in fact, not only identiﬁes the position zj of the
projection but also determines its angle βj.
Suppose there are M angles acquired over 360◦. Then, the acquired angles
repeat such that βj − βj+M = 0. How far has the patient moved when the angle
repeats? This is determined by the pitch of the helix, which is given by
ζ = zj+M − zj , (6.43)
which is in turn determined by the speed of gantry rotation and the table speed.
Suppose that we want to reconstruct an image at the longitudinal position
z. In conventional (single-slice) tomography, we would need many projections
taken at a collection of angles within the axial plane passing through z.I n
the helical geometry, however, we are not guaranteed even to have one such
projection (because z may not correspond tozn for any n). It is standard practice
to ‘‘create’’ the needed projections using linear interpolation of the projections
that are measured in nearby slices. For example, suppose we would like the
projection corresponding to the angle β
j. We know that the projection angle βj
is acquired at all linear positions zj+kM for k = 0, 1, 2,.... It is straightforward
to ﬁnd k such that zj+kM ≤ z < zj+[k+1]M. We know that the scanner acquires
projections at angleβj at both positionszj+kM and zj+[k+1]M. Linear interpolation
between these two projections yields an estimate of the desired projection
ˆpz(γ, βj) = z − zj+kM
ζ pzj+[k+1]M (γ, βj)
+zj+[k+1]M − z
ζ pzj+kM (γ, βj) , (6.44)
which is valid for any position γ within the projection. This procedure can be
repeated for all j = 1, ... , M, noting that the choice of k depends on both z and
j. In this way, a complete set of projections for fan-beam reconstruction of the
2-D slice at z is created. A fan-beam reconstruction formula can then be used to
reconstruct a picture of the slice.
Many factors will affect the quality of a helical CT image. In particular,
the quality of interpolated data will be affected by the pitch of the helix. The
pitch is determined by the rate of rotation of the gantry and the speed of the
table feed. If the pitch is too big, while the fan is too thin, then aliasing artifacts
will appear. To compensate, the fan could be made thicker, which provides a
natural analog low-pass ﬁlter. Then, the images will be free from aliasing but
will be blurry. In clinical scanners today, protocols are preset into the scanner