110 Chapter 4 Physics of Radiography
medical imaging has energies ranging from about 25 keV to 500 keV. Broadly
speaking, the ‘‘easiest’’ atom to ionize is a hydrogen atom, since it has the
smallest average electron binding energy. Tungsten may be about the ‘‘most
difﬁcult’’ to ionize in the substances normally encountered in medical imaging.
Using the range of ionizing radiations energies given above and the binding
energies for these two elements, we can conclude that a single ionizing particle
or ray used in medical imaging is capable of ionizing between 10 and 40,000
atoms before its energy is exhausted.
If an ionizing particle or ray transfers some energy to a bound electron but
less than the electron’s binding energy, then the electron is raised to a higher
energy state—to a more outer orbit—but is not ejected. This process is called
excitation. In both ionization and excitation, an electron shell is left with a
‘‘hole’’ that must be ﬁlled in order to return the atom to a lower energy state.
The ﬁlling of these open holes comprises an important source of secondary
radiation called characteristic radiation, which we will explore below.
EXAMPLE 4.1
Suppose an electron is accelerated within a vacuum from a heated cathode held at ground
potential to an anode held at 120 kV (DC).
Question If the anode is made of tungsten, what is the maximum number of tungsten
atoms that can be ionized on average?
Answer The electron will have kinetic energy equal to 120 keV upon reaching the
anode (recall the deﬁnition of eV). The average binding energy of tungsten is 4 keV.
Therefore, the maximum number of tungsten atoms that can be ionized on average is
120 keV/4k e V= 30.
4.3 Forms of Ionizing Radiation
Ionizing radiation can be divided into two broad categories: particulate and
electromagnetic. We now describe these types of radiation in some detail.
4.3.1 Particulate Radiation
Any subatomic particle (i.e., a proton, neutron, or electron) can be considered
to be ionizing radiation if it possesses enough kinetic energy to ionize an atom.
In calculating the kinetic energy of these particles, relativistic effects cannot be
ignored since the particles often travel at a signiﬁcant fraction of the speed of
light. As a particle approaches the speed of light, its relativistic mass increases,
which signiﬁcantly increases its kinetic energy above that which would be
calculated using the usual low-speed approximation.
From Einstein’s theory of relativity, we know that the (relativistic) mass of
a particle is given by
m = m
0√
1 − v2/c2
, (4.1)