3.6 Sampling 81
Figure 3.12
Illustration of coarse (left)
and ﬁne (right)
rectangular sampling
schemes. Although coarse
sampling results in fewer
samples, it may not allow
reconstruction of the
original continuous signal
from these samples.x
y
/H9004x/H9004x
/H9004y /H9004y
x
y
we give in to this temptation, we will end up (in the extreme case) with only one
sample, which is clearly not enough to represent a continuous signal in general
(unless the signal is constant).
Sampling a continuous signal with too few samples results in a type of signal
corruption called aliasing, in which higher frequencies ‘‘take the alias of’’ lower
frequencies. A signal sampled with too few samples cannot be reconstructed
from its discrete representation; the best possible continuous reconstruction
from these samples will be corrupted by aliasing. The visual appearance of
this artifact depends on the signal’s spectrum, but generally it appears as new
high-frequency patterns where none should exist. The spatial frequency of
these patterns is always lower than it should be but may be relatively high
compared with other spatial information in the image. An example of this
phenomenon is depicted in Figure 3.13. The improperly sampled image, as
shown in Figure 3.13(b), is corrupted by a high-frequency texture that is not
present in the original image. When proper anti-aliasing is used, as described in
Section 3.6.3, sampling will produce an image with reduced resolution but no
aliasing artifacts, as shown in Figure 3.13(c). Obviously, it is vital that medical
imaging systems sample without aliasing.
3.6.1 Signal Model for Sampling
It is intuitive to believe that a slowly varying signal could be reconstructed
from fewer samples than a rapidly varying signal, which may require ﬁner
sampling at regions of rapid signal variation. Since signal variation in space
is directly associated with frequency content, we suspect that there must be a
direct relationship between the appropriate values of sampling periods /Delta1x and
/Delta1y and the frequency content of the signal under consideration. Here, we prove
this intuition mathematically, and derive a recipe for choosing appropriate
values for /Delta1x and /Delta1y. We do this by using the comb function comb( x, y),
given by (2.13), and its close relative, the sampling function δ
s(x, y;/Delta1x, /Delta1y),
given by (2.14).