260 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
Figure 8.4
Example arrangement of
61 PMTs on the face of a
circular Anger camera.
Rectangular scintillators
are most commonly used
today and more complex
shapes and arrangements
of the PMTs are used to
ﬁt those crystals.
x
y
8.2.4 Positioning Logic
When a gamma photon interacts with the crystal, thousands of scintillation
photons are produced, and every PMT produces an output pulse. The goal of
the Anger camera’s positioning logic circuitry is to determine both where the
event occurred on the face of the crystal (see Figure 8.4) and the combined
output of all the tubes, which represents the light output of the crystal (which
in turn represents the energy deposited by the gamma photon). These output
signals are denoted asX and Y for the estimated two-dimensional position of the
event and Z for the total light output (which is proportional to the total energy
deposited in the crystal by that gamma photon). The amplitude of a given tube’s
output is directly proportional to the amount of light (number of scintillation
photons) its photocathode receives. The tubes closest to the scintillation event
will have the largest output pulses, while those farther away will have smaller
output pulses. By analyzing the spatial distribution of pulse heights, the location
of a single scintillation event ( X, Y) can be determined quite accurately—to
within a fraction of the diameter of a PMT, in fact. We will discuss this process
later, but for now it is important to remember that the rate of (X, Y, Z) signals
or pulses coming from the camera is proportional to total radioactivity, and
the size or height of each Z-pulse is proportional to the energy deposited in the
crystal by the gamma photon for the event that (X, Y, Z) represents.
8.2.5 Pulse Height Analyzer
The desired goal of the Anger camera is to create an image that portrays
the distribution of radioactivity (i.e., sites and numbers of radioactive atoms)
within the patient. Because the collimator only allows those photons traveling
in predetermined directions to interact in the crystal, a line drawn from the
scintillation event in the crystal through the nearest collimator hole is presumed
to intersect the site of origin of the photon (i.e., the radioactive atom it came
from) in the patient. If the photon has been Compton scattered in the patient,