4.2 Ionization 109
4.2.2 Electron Binding Energy
It is energetically more favorable for an electron to be bound in an atom rather
than to be free. In other words, the total energy of the atom is less than the total
energy of the atom (minus the electron) and the (free) electron. The difference
between these two energies is called the electron binding energy. Binding energy
is usually speciﬁed in units of electron volts (eV). Recall that one electron volt
is equal to the kinetic energy gained by an electron when accelerated across
one volt potential. For comparison with more conventional units of energy,
1e V = 1.6 × 10−12 ergs = 1.6 × 10−19 J.
A given electron’s binding energy depends on the element to which the
electron is bound and the shell within which the given electron resides. For any
given element, electron binding energy decreases with increasing shell number.
The binding energy of the sole electron in a hydrogen atom is 13.6 eV, the
smallest binding energy among all ‘‘lighter’’ atoms (i.e., those having smaller
atomic numbers). There are even smaller electron binding energies in the outer
orbits of the ‘‘heavier elements.’’ For example, some electrons in the O-shell
of mercury atoms have binding energies equal to 7.8 eV. For our purposes,
however, it is sufﬁcient to consider an ‘‘average’’ binding energy of the electrons
in a given atom or even in a given molecule. For example, the average binding
energy for air is about 34 eV. Metals have signiﬁcantly larger average electron
binding energies. For example, the average binding energy of lead is about 1 keV
and for tungsten it is about 4 keV.
4.2.3 Ionization and Excitation
If radiation (particulate or EM) transfers energy to an orbiting electron (in an
atom of the material the radiation is passing through) which is equal to or
greater than that electron’s binding energy, then the electron is ejected from the
atom. This process, illustrated in Figure 4.3, is called ionization. It yields an
ion (an atom with a +1 charge in this case) and the electron that came from
it, which together are called an ion pair. By convention, radiation with energy
greater than or equal to 13.6 eV is considered ionizing; all other radiations are
considered nonionizing.
It is possible for a single ionizing radiation emission to ionize many atoms
along its path before its energy is exhausted. The ionizing radiation we use in Figure 4.3
After an ionization event,
the ejected electron plus
the ion have more energy
than the original atom.
Atom Ion
Free electron
Radiation
Bound energy /H11021 Unbound energy /H11001 Electron energy
/H11002
/H11002