5.3 Image Formation 167
to understand the basic terminology and characteristics of ﬁlm, as similar
concepts can be applied to CR and DR.
The intrinsic spatial resolution of ﬁlm is generally signiﬁcantly better than
that of the intensifying screen; so, for most situations, we can ignore the
spatial frequency characteristics of the ﬁlm. If necessary or desirable, the spatial
resolution of ﬁlm can be modeled by a point spread function analogous to
that of the detector blur above; the overall performance would be a cascade
of subsystems, as depicted in (2.46), (3.29), and (3.30). Rather than a ﬁlm’s
spatial resolution properties, it is its intensity transformation properties that are
of primary interest here.
Because ﬁlm is a very poor direct detector of x-rays, we will ignore the image
created directly on the ﬁlm by the x-rays themselves and only consider the image
created by the light produced in the phosphors adjacent to the ﬁlm. The
parameters of interest are the contrast or gamma of the ﬁlm, and its dynamic
range or latitude; we will deﬁne these terms in a moment. We use many different
types of ﬁlm with varying contrast and latitude depending upon the type of
x-ray examination desired. Those of you who are amateur photographers may
have a practical appreciation of these ﬁlm characteristics.
We consider the relationship between the amount of light that is incident
upon the ﬁlm and the ﬁnal image that is viewed when the ﬁlm is exposed, devel-
oped, and placed on a light source (‘‘light box’’). The light photons that are
captured by the ﬁlm produce a latent image(i.e., it is not visible). When the ﬁlm
is developed, that latent image produces a blackening of the ﬁlm. We therefore
characterize ﬁlm as a transformation between exposure to light and the degree of
blackening of the ﬁlm, which is characterized by the optical densityof the ﬁlm.
When a developed ﬁlm is viewed on a light box, the blacker parts of the
ﬁlm absorb more of the light coming from the box, creating the impression of a
gray level image when viewed by the eye. The optical transmissivity is deﬁned
as the fraction of light transmitted through the exposed ﬁlm or
T = I
t
Ii
, (5.30)
where Ii is the irradiance of the incident light and It is the irradiance of the
transmitted light, both in units of energy per unit area per second. For example,
the darker parts of the ﬁlm might have a transmissivity of 0.1, while the more
transparent parts might have a transmissivity of 0.9. The optical opacity is the
inverse of the transmissivity, and theoptical densityis deﬁned to be the common
logarithm of the optical opacity,
D = log
10
Ii
It
. (5.31)
We see that the optical density characterizes how black the ﬁlm is on a
logarithmic scale. Optical densities in the range of 0.25–2.25 are usable, but the
human eye discriminates shades of gray best when 1.0 < D < 1.5.
We now appreciate that the appearance of the x-ray ﬁlm after exposure
and development is determined by the spatial distribution of optical density,
D(x, y). How does x-ray exposure relate to optical density? We ﬁrst recall from
Chapter 4 that x-ray exposure X is measured in units of roentgens (R); in
particular, 3,876 R of exposure is equivalent to 1 C of charge per kilogram of
air; the charge comes from the ions produced by the x-ray interactions. For