5.2 Instrumentation 149
The remainder of the XRII resembles a standard image intensiﬁer, such
as that found in night vision devices. The light photons generated in the input
phosphor strike a photocathode, which in turn generates free electrons within the
vacuum tube. The electrons are accelerated through a series of electrodes (called
dynodes) toward the anode, which is kept at a voltage of 25–35 kV relative to
the cathode. The free electrons do not strike the dynodes as in photomultiplier
tubes (see Chapter 8). Instead, the electrons are shaped by the dynodes into an
(inverted) electron intensity image that represents the intensity of x-rays entering
the XRII. The voltage proﬁle of the dynodes can be altered—continuously in
some systems and in discrete steps in other systems—to provide variable image
magniﬁcation. For example, a 40-cm XRII could be used to image a 20 cm ﬁeld
of view.
The electrons accelerate through the XRII until they are absorbed by either
the anode or the output phosphor screen. The output phosphor is a P20-type
phosphor deposited on the output window, typically a 15-mm piece of glass
25–35 mm in diameter. A thin aluminum ﬁlm placed on the inner side of
the phosphor acts as the anode and a reﬂector, keeping light from passing
back into the XRII, which might otherwise cause secondary excitation of the
photocathode. The light passing through the output window typically encounters
a lens, which magniﬁes the image.
The magniﬁed light image leaving the XRII can be used in several ways,
three of which are depicted in Figure 5.11. First, a light sensor can be put into
the ﬁeld to provide an automatic gain control—that is, feedback to the x-ray
tube current—to provide a relatively constant image brightness throughout an
exam. Second, the main function of a ﬂuoroscope is achieved by feeding the
light image into a TV camera, which provides real-time viewing capability by
sending the camera’s signal into a standard TV monitor. Finally, using a splitter,
the image can also be fed into a ﬁlm camera, which can capture selected still
images onto ﬁlm.
5.2.7 Digital Radiography
Digital radiographic systems are rapidly replacing ﬁlm-screen combinations.
Although the ﬁrst version of such systems was introduced in the 1980s, it
took over twenty years for the cost to be driven down and for the quality to
improve sufﬁciently for these systems (and subsequent versions of these systems)
to compete successfully with ﬁlm-based systems. There are four types of digital
systems, which we describe next, all of which are in clinical use today.
Computed Radiography Systems Computed radiography (CR) systems store
latent images inphotostimulable imaging plates(PSPs), which are removed from
the x-ray system and scanned using a special laser scanner to form a digital
image. The PSP is a phosphor typically made from barium ﬂuorohalide bromides
and iodides with europium activators. Detected x-ray photons are absorbed in
the phospor by the photoelectric effect, which causes electrons to be ejected
from atoms in the detector. About half of these electrons will recombine with
the resulting ions causing light to be emitted (as in a typical image intensifying
screen). The remaining electrons will be temporarily trapped in the ﬂuorohalides,