xvi Preface
Part IV covers ultrasound imaging. It begins in Chapter 10 with a brief
presentation of the physics of sound, and continues in Chapter 11 with the
various imaging modes offered within this rich modality. Part V covers mag-
netic resonance imaging. Chapter 12 presents the physics of nuclear magnetic
resonance, and Chapter 13 continues with a presentation of various magnetic
resonance imaging techniques.
We have used the ﬁrst edition of this book for a one-semester upper-
level/graduate course on medical imaging systems. In order to cover the material
in one semester, we routinely skip some material in the book, and we move
at a very brisk pace. Although it was very tempting to add more depth
in modern instrumentation, reconstruction methods, and diagnostic uses of
medical imaging, we feel that this breadth of material could not be covered in
one semester with sufﬁcient depth, and would be inconsistent with our primary
goal of providing a uniﬁed view of medical imaging from a signals and systems
point of view. On the other hand, we feel that this book could be used as the basis
for a two-semester course, perhaps by covering Parts I–III in the ﬁrst semester
and Parts IV–V in the second semester. A two-semester approach would allow
instructors to use supplementary materials for additional depth in the physics
and instrumentation of medical imaging, or to present current research topics.
Medical imaging is very visual—just ask any radiologist. Although the
formalism of signals and systems is mathematical, we understand the advan-
tages offered through visualization. Therefore, the book contains many images
and diagrams. Some are strictly pedagogical, offered in conjunction with the
exposition or an example problem. Others are motivational, revealing inter-
esting features for discussion or study. Special emphasis is made to provide
biologically relevant examples, so that the important context of medical imag-
ing can be appreciated by students. Many images have been added or replaced
in this edition, in order to provide better coverage of current use and to provide
reference images to help explain features and qualities of the various modalilties.
New to This Edition
The second edition of this book arose primarily from the need to provide
updates to the technology and methods in medical imaging systems, which have
undergone substantial development since the ﬁrst edition. At the same time,
we were able to incorporate changes to the organization of the book and to
improve certain aspects of pedagogy. Instructors and students alike now have
more modern material from the core medical imaging modalities while still
maintaining the signal processing perspective in a uniﬁed treatment of medical
imaging signal and systems.
The most signiﬁcant changes to this new edition include:
• Completely rewritten overview sections including many new images to better
motivate and explain the core modalities that use x-rays, radioactivity,
ultrasound, and nuclear magnetic resonance.
• New sections on digital radiography systems and mammography in projec-
tion radiography.
• A new section on multi-row detectors in computed tomography.