60 Chapter 3 Image Quality
For a typical nonisotropic medical imaging system,
0 ≤ MTF(u, v) = |H(u, v)|
H(0, 0) ≤ MTF(0, 0) = 1, for every u, v. (3.11)
3.2.3 Local Contrast
The identiﬁcation of some speciﬁc object or feature within an image is only
possible if its value differs from that of surrounding areas. The deﬁnition of
modulation or contrast for sinusoidal signals can be adapted for use in this
situation as well. It is common in many imaging modalities (e.g., nuclear
medicine) to refer to an object of interest (e.g., a tumor in the liver) as the
target, as illustrated in Figure 3.5. Suppose that the target has a nominal image
intensity of f
t. The target (i.e., the tumor) is surrounded by other tissues (i.e.,
the liver tissue), called the background, which may obscure our ability to see or
detect the target. Suppose that the background has a nominal image intensity of
fb. The difference between the target and its background is captured by thelocal
contrast, deﬁned as
C = ft − fb
fb
. (3.12)
The deﬁnition of local contrast in (3.12) differs from the deﬁnition of
modulation in (3.1) for sinusoidal signals in that the intensities ft and fb may
be selected locally—for example, within the liver—and they need not be the
maximum and minimum intensities within the image as a whole. For example,
ft could be taken to be the average image intensity within the tumor, whereas
fb could be taken as the average image intensity within the liver. The tumor
intensity could be larger than fb or less than fb.I f ft is less than fb, then C
is negative and, in certain circumstances, it may be convenient to report its
absolute value.
EXAMPLE 3.2
Consider an image showing an organ with intensityIo and a tumor with intensityIt > Io.
Question What is the local contrast of the tumor? If we add a constant intensityIc > 0
to the image, what is the local contrast? Is the local contrast improved?
Answer By deﬁnition, the local contrast of the tumor is
C = It − Io
Io
.
Figure 3.5
Local contrast scenario.
x
ft
fb
Target
Background