116 Chapter 4 Physics of Radiography
Figure 4.5
When energetic electrons
bombard a target, two
kinds of x-rays are
produced: characteristic
x-rays and
bremsstrahlung x-rays.
Low-energy x-rays of
both types are absorbed
by the medium.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Relative x-ray intensity
X-ray photon energy, keV
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
Bremsstrahlung
radiation
69.081 keV
67.244 keV
66.950 keV
59.321 keV57.984 keV
Characteristic
radiation (tungsten)
58 keV (from an L-shell to K-shell transition), 67 keV (from an M-shell to
K-shell transition), and 69 keV (from a very outer shell to K-shell transition), as
shown in Figure 4.5. (Transitions to the L-shell or M-shell result in such low-
energy characteristic x-rays that they are either absorbed within the tungsten
anode or ﬁltered out by the x-ray tube.)
4.4.2 Primary Electromagnetic Radiation Interactions
EM ionizing radiation interacts with matter through signiﬁcantly different
mechanisms than particulate ionizing radiation. The three main mechanisms by
which EM ionizing radiation interacts with materials are (1) the photoelectric
effect, (2) Compton scatter, and (3) pair production. Since a photon must have
at least 1.02 MeV of energy for pair production to occur and since the range of
photon energies in medical imaging is about 25–500 keV, we will consider only
the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering here.
In both the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering, an incident x-ray
photon interacts with the electron cloud of an atom. The primary difference
between the two interactions is that in the photoelectric effect the photon is
completely absorbed by the atom, while in Compton scattering the photon is
not absorbed but instead loses energy and changes its direction. Both effects
are important in imaging human tissues. The photoelectric effect is the primary
mechanism that provides contrast between different types of tissues; Compton
scattering is a primary mechanism for limiting the resolution of x-ray images,
both in projection radiography and computed tomography. We now study both
interactions in some detail.
Photoelectric Effect In the photoelectric effect, a photon with energy hν
interacts with the coulomb ﬁeld of the nucleus of an atom, causing the ejection
of an electron, usually a K-shell electron, from the atom. This process is
illustrated in Figures 4.6(a) and (b). The incident photon is completely absorbed