8.4 Image Quality 281
It is often very useful to characterize our ability to discern a hot spot or
cold spot from the background. This requires the concept of contrast C,a s
introduced in Section 3.2. The contrast here is the fractional change in counts
in a pixel or set of pixels from the background. If Nb is the mean background
count and Nt is the mean target count, then the contrast is deﬁned [in a fashion
analogous to (3.12)] as
C = Nt − Nb
Nb
. (8.25)
The local SNR is deﬁned as
SNRl = Nt − Nb√
Nb
, (8.26)
which is readily simpliﬁed [see (5.38)] to yield
SNRl = C
√
Nb . (8.27)
As a practical matter, the mean count is not known, anywhere, since it is
a parameter of an unknown probability mass function. Instead, averages are
used to approximate means. For example, if tn, n = 1, ... , N represents N pixel
counts within a target and bm, m = 1, ... , M represents M pixel counts within
the background (e.g., surrounding the target), then the means are estimated as
ˆNt = 1
N
N∑
n=1
tn , (8.28)
ˆNb = 1
M
M∑
m=1
bm . (8.29)
These estimates are then used in (8.27) to provide an estimate of the local
SNR. This kind of calculation is used in practice to evaluate the detectability
of objects, providing guidance about the choices of collimators, imaging times,
pixel dimensions, etc.
8.4.6 Factors Affecting Count Rate
It is clear from the previous section that increasing the total number of detected
and correctly positioned events will improve the SNR in images created using an
Anger camera. The simplest approach to achieve this would be to increase the
image acquisition duration, but this is usually undesirable in nuclear medicine for
several reasons. The longer the acquisition, the greater the chance the patient will
move, introducing motion blur in the image. As well, the longer the acquisition,
the greater the chance that the radiotracer’s distribution will change (because of
the underlying physiological and biochemical processes). Finally, the longer the
acquisition, the fewer the number of patients who can be imaged in a workday
and the greater the discomfort and inconvenience each patient experiences.