152 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
dimension (termed horizontal)—for example, the expected maximum width of
a human chest. If demagniﬁcation is required, it is relatively small (on the order
of 2:1 or 3:1), and it is carried out using ﬁber optic ‘‘light pipes’’ so that only
a small proportion of light photons are lost. For example, a typical complete-
coverage geometry would use eight detector arrays, each 5.5 cm by 1.1 cm, tiled
together to yield a single linear detector of dimension 44 cm by 1.1 cm. The CCD
detector might have 342 elements in the horizontal direction and 68 elements
in the vertical direction. The x-rays are then collimated into a fan beam and
directed at the linear CCD detector, which can collect data simultaneously for
a small collection of horizontal rows—for example, 68 rows—of the digital
image in parallel. To collect additional rows, either the entire apparatus—x-ray
source, collimator, and detector—are translated (vertically) together or just the
source collimator and detector are translated (vertically) together. Translation
can be carried out, depending on the ﬁeld of view, over a time period between 8
and 15 seconds. Patients having a chest x-ray using this type of system would be
required to hold their breath for the duration of the scan in order to minimize
motion artifacts due to breathing.
Thin-Film-Transistor-Based Digital Radiography Systems CCD detectors have
pixel sizes that are inherently small and cannot be scaled up due to noise
that is added in the charge transfer mechanism with larger detector areas.
Therefore, although constructing large CCD detectors—for example, large
enough to be full-ﬁeld detectors such as that achieved by ﬁlm and PSPs—is
technically possible, cost, sensitivity to x-ray damage, complexity, low-speed,
and calibration issues currently make this impractical. However, the advantage
of having a direct digital read-out afforded in CCD cameras is clear, and
thin-ﬁlm-transistor-based digital radiography systems provide that capability.
Thin ﬁlm transistors (TFTs) are made by depositing thin ﬁlms of a semi-
conductor material, a dielectric, and metal conductors onto glass. In ﬂat panel
displays, which are familiar to us because they are used in modern LCD and LED
television systems, the transistors are laid out in a 2-D grid so that each pixel can
be activated by addressing a horizontal and vertical wire simultaneously—this
is the so-called active matrix technology. In x-ray ﬂat panel detectors, the TFT
active matrix design is used to read out a charge that has accumulated at each
pixel due to x-ray ﬂux.
To completely specify the TFT-based ﬂat panel detector, we must specify
how the x-rays will be detected and charge will be accumulated. There are two
methods, so-called indirect and direct, both of which lead to charge stored on
a capacitor associated with each image pixel. Indirect detection is very familiar
to us: A scintillator, typically CsI:Tl, is placed between the x-ray source and the
TFT matrix, which causes detected x-rays to generate light photons. Amorphous
silicon (a-Si) is then used as a photodiode to convert the light emitted from the
scintillator to charge on the storage capacitors. Direct detection, on the other
hand, uses amorphous selenium (a-Se) to directly convert x-rays to electrons,
which are then moved directly to the storage capacitors using an applied voltage
across the selenium plate. Currently, ﬂat panel detectors based on the indirect
detection method are more common, in part because these detectors are faster
(i.e., high light output and shorter afterglow, which is important in temporal
acquisitions such as ﬂuoroscopy) and they have lower noise. However, direct