196 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
but they are highly directional, and therefore appropriate for the geometry of 3G
scanners. Solid-state detectors must be accompanied by external collimation in
order to provide necessary directivity (i.e., scatter rejection). In order to provide
both good resolution and high efﬁciency, in a single-slice scanner (single-row
detector CT or SDCT) each crystal would typically be 1.0m m × 15 mm in area.
An important concept related to detector dimensions is slice thickness.I na
typical CT scanner, the axial response (along the z-direction) is a rect function
whose width is the slice thickness. The maximum slice thickness is equal to the
detector height, 15 mm in the typical SDCT case. Smaller slice thicknesses are
created by further restricting the beam using movable blades in the x-ray tube
collimator. Slice thickness is controlled at the console and is typically set in
millimeter increments, starting from 1 mm.
In a MDCT systems, as shown in Figure 6.6(c), the individual solid-state
detectors are typically 1.0m m × 1.25 mm in size. In these systems, slice thickness
is controlled by both the axial beam width and the combined detector height.
In particular, MDCT systems have digital switching arrays that can group
detectors together in order to synthesize detector widths in multiples of the
physical detector heights. Accordingly, slice thicknesses are selected in multiples
of the detector height and the beam width is chosen to cover the desired axial
acquisition. For example, if there are 16 rows of detectors, each 1.25 mm in
height, we could acquire 16 simultaneous projections, each 1.25 mm thick.
Alternatively, we could acquire eight simultaneous projections, each 2.5 mm
thick, and so on. We will see later that there is a tradeoff in image quality that
must be addressed in selecting slice thickness, so it is not always a good idea to
simply acquire the thinnest possible slices.
6.2.5 Gantry, Slip Ring, and Patient Table
The gantry of a CT system holds the x-ray tube and detectors so that they can
be rotated around the patient rapidly and repeatably. The fan angle, size of the
detector array, and separation between the x-ray tube and detector array must
be capable of imaging a 50 cm (typical) FOV. A full 2-D scan in under 1 second
is required. The gantry can typically be tilted in order to facilitate acquisition of
nonaxial slices.
Most modern scanners are capable of continuous rotation without requiring
a ‘‘rewinding’’ of the source and detectors. Since there are large voltages that
must go to the x-ray tube and hundreds of signals that must be transmitted out
of the detectors, continuous rotation makes special demands on the mechanical
and electrical design, which the slip ring solves. A slip ring contains a large
cylinder with grooves on the outside so that brushes can make continuous
electrical contact with the rotating cylinder. The x-ray tube and detectors are
mounted inside the cylinder and are in continuous electrical contact with the
(stationary) controlling and data processing electronic hardware.
The patient table is more than just a place to put the patient. In helical
scanners, it is an integral part of the data acquisition hardware, since it must
be moved smoothly and precisely in synchrony with the source and detector
rotation. Even in single-slice scanners, the table’s positioning capabilities must
be quite ﬂexible. Typically, the table can be extended well out from the gantry
and lowered in order to facilitate patient transfer from a hospital bed. It must