222 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
in which the mean energy of the x-ray spectrum increases while propagating
through the body. In the human body, the linear attenuation coefﬁcient decreases
with increasing E, as shown in Figure 4.8. Therefore, low-energy photons are
preferentially absorbed. Hence, since all CT x-ray sources have a distribution
(spectrum) of energies, the propagating beam becomes richer in high-energy
photons.
We had concluded in Section 6.2 that the concept of effective energy could
be used for polyenergetic sources. However, this concept assumes that the exit
spectrum is the same as the entering spectrum. When this is not true, and
standard reconstruction methods are used, the so-called interpetrous lucency
artifact may appear. (It is called ‘‘interpetrous’’ because it often occurs in bone.)
This artifact, which is particularly apparent in head scans (because of the outer
ring of bone), creates a kind of halo effect around the brain parenchyma. In other
parts of the body, streak artifacts, particularly at the tips of bones and at metal
pieces within the body (shrapnel, surgical clips, screws, etc.) may also appear.
Methods exist for compensating for or eliminating these artifacts, including
preprocessing projection data, postprocessing images, and dual-energy imaging.
In general, radiologists simply know to expect them and interpret the images
accordingly.
Other Artifacts Three other sources of artifacts in CT images are worth
mentioning: (1) electronic or system drift, (2) x-ray scatter, and (3) motion. The
electronic or system artifact of particular interest is that which is caused by
miscalibration or gain drift. The most dramatic effect is caused by the complete
failure of a detector. In a 3G scanner, this situation (usually) causes the detector
to report zero photons, and thus 100% attenuation at all angular positions.
The resulting reconstruction contains a ring artifact whose radius is equal to the
position of the defective detector from the detector array’s center.
X-ray scatter generally causes a convolutional blurring of each projection.
3
A blurred projection creates a blurry image. It is possible to prevent scatter by
collimation and/or selective energy detection, but this comes at the expense of
lower efﬁciency. It is also possible to compensate for scatter by deconvolution,
but this has the tendency to further increase the noise in the projections. One
way that has been used to measure the amount of scattering present is off-plane
detectors.
Finally, motion is a difﬁcult problem. Since a complete scan takes (typically)
between 0.3 seconds (for a single slice) and 10 seconds (for a full thoracic scan),
the heart is almost certainly going to have signiﬁcant motion during the scan.
Breathing is going to be a problem on the longer scans or when patients cannot
hold their breath. It is possible to gate the data acquisition so that data will be
taken only at a certain stage in the cardiac cycle and/or breathing cycle. The
data acquired over successive cycles can then be pieced together and treated as
if they were taken simultaneously. These methods are used on some machines
in certain clinical situations where deemed necessary.
3This may have the desirable property of low-pass ﬁltering the projection if aliasing is a problem.