4.6 Radiation Dosimetry 127
imaging properties, is intractable from a mathematical standpoint. The concept
of effective energy (see Example 4.4) is more useful, as we shall see.
4.5.4 Broad Beam Case
Now consider the broad beam geometry in Figure 4.7(b), which should be
compared with the narrow beam geometry in Figure 4.7(a). In (b), the x-ray
beam is seven times wider and has 7 N as many photons (the number 7 being
used here for illustration purposes). When the slab is removed, the detector,
having the same width as in (a), will detect onlyN photons, since the remaining
photons miss the detector. When the slab is in place, photons previously directed
at the detector might be absorbed by photoelectric interactions or scattered by
Compton events—just as they are in the narrow beam case. However, there is
an additional possibility here: photons from outside the detector’s line-of-sight
geometry might get scattered toward the detector by Compton interactions.
Thus, in the broad beam case, more photons are generally detected than is
predicted by a monoenergetic, narrow beam analysis. The general attenuation
law [(4.24) and (4.25)] does not hold in this case, and the assumption of straight
propagation of x-rays is also violated. Furthermore, the photons that comprise
the detected burst are no longer monoenergetic, since the Compton scattering
process reduces photon energy. In such a situation, the average or effective
energy of the x-ray beam is reduced, a process called beam softening.
Fortunately, most x-ray imaging modalities use detector collimation, which
reduces the number of x-rays from nonnormal directions that can hit the
detectors. Therefore, from an imaging standpoint, the narrow beam geometry
assumption can be viewed as fairly accurate. We make the assumption of narrow
beam geometry throughout this book. From the point of view of calculating
the dose to the patient or determining how much lead is needed to shield a
radiologist or technician, however, broad beam geometry must be considered.
After all, there is no detector collimation on the ‘‘human detectors’’ involved in
the imaging process.
4.6 Radiation Dosimetry
There are many ways to report the presence and amount of radiation. We have
already described the ideas related to photon and energy ﬂow via ﬂuence and
intensity concepts. We did so with a focus on the production of medical images.
However, radiation also produces adverse biological effects. Here, we are now
more concerned with what EM radiationdoes than what itis. That is the essence
of the concept of dose.
4.6.1 Exposure
By deﬁnition, ionizing radiation is capable of ionizing the hydrogen atom.
Therefore, it is capable of producing ions in air. It is straightforward to build
and calibrate anionization chamberthat measures the current produced between
two plates held at a ﬁxed potential due to radiation producing ions in the air
between the two plates.