170 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Suppose that all photons arriving at the detector have the same energy, hν,
which might be called the effective energy in the actual case of a polyenergetic
x-ray beam (see Example 4.4). In this case [combining (4.14) and (4.17)], the
intensity is related to the number of photons by
I = Nhν
A/Delta1t , (5.35)
where A is a small area on the detector—for example, a pixel—and /Delta1t is the
duration of the x-ray burst. The number of photons N is a Poisson random
variable, and in the background, we can denote the average number of photons
per burst per area A as Nb. Then, the average background intensity is given by
Ib = Nbhν
A/Delta1t . (5.36)
Also, the variance of the number of photons per burst per area A in the
background is given by
σ2
b = Nb
( hν
A/Delta1t
)2
. (5.37)
From (5.34), (5.35), (5.36), and (5.37), the local SNR is given by
SNR = C
√
Nb . (5.38)
Equation (5.38) reveals a fundamental tradeoff in x-ray imaging. In order to
improve the visibility of a particular structure in a radiograph, it is necessary to
either increase the contrast of the structure or to increase the number of photons
used in the visualization or analysis (or both). The contrast of the structure
might be improved by changing the energy of the x-rays or by using a contrast
agent or dual-energy techniques. (See Problem 5.20.) The number of photons
might be increased by several methods: by increasing the ﬁlament current, the
duration of the x-ray pulse, or the energy of the x-rays (which would then
penetrate the body better), or by using larger area elements (pixels) or a more
efﬁcient detector.
Recall that the x-ray tube provides a spectrum of x-ray energies ranging from
low energies to the maximum energy determined by the peak kilovoltage applied
to the x-ray tube anode. By changing the kVp, we modify the x-ray energy.
Contrast, SNR, and patient radiation exposure (dose) are markedly affected by
changes in the kVp. For example, at low kVp and therefore low x-ray energies,
image contrast is high because the difference between the attenuation of different
body tissues increases as energy decreases. However, the body is less transparent
to x-rays at lower energies, so that fewer x-ray photons penetrate the body.
Hence, although C is high, N is low, and it turns out that SNR is low. Because
the body is highly absorbent to these low energy x-ray photons, the patient
radiation dose is high.
At high energies, on the other hand, contrast is low, as the attenuation
coefﬁcients for different types of body tissues become similar. While the body is
highly transparent at high energies, the number of x-ray photons per Roentgen
decreases, and therefore for a given radiation exposure, the SNR will be low
at very high energies. Between high and low x-ray energies, the SNR achieves a
maximum at a point where there is reasonably good tissue contrast, the body is