9.1 Instrumentation 295
stacked to form a reconstructed volume. We will have much more to say about
this in Section 9.2.
Two types of collimators are used in a rotating-camera SPECT system (see
Section 8.2.1). Most often, a parallel-hole collimator is used; this geometry
corresponds to that of parallel-beam geometry in CT. Here, the geometry is
parallel both in-plane and in the axial direction. In some cases, a fan-beam
collimator is used. This collimator converges in-plane, like a converging col-
limator but has parallel-hole geometry in the axial direction. With fan-beam
collimation in each contiguous 1-D projection, the ‘‘stack’’ has fan-beam
geometry, but the slice-to-slice geometry is parallel. In rare cases until now
(although increasingly more often than in the past), a collimator-detector
system with more complicated geometry is used, requiring more sophisticated
reconstruction algorithms. Such systems are brieﬂy considered below.
Perhaps the biggest advance in the most commonly used clinical SPECT
systems is the incorporation of multiple Anger cameras—a dual-head system is
shown in Figure 9.1. As shown in Table 9.1, adding camera heads increases sen-
sitivity, all else being equal. Dual-head variable-angle systems that are capable
of orienting the heads at both 90
◦ and 180◦ are particularly popular as this opti-
mizes the acquisition geometry for the two most commonly performed nuclear
medicine procedures: cardiac SPECT and whole-body bone scans. These two
types of studies account for at least 70 percent of all nuclear medicine imaging
procedures. Cardiac SPECT is often performed with 180
◦ acquisition (i.e., only
a 180 ◦ arc of projection data around the heart is acquired), whereas many
other SPECT studies use 360◦ of projection data. This has been a controversial
issue for over two decades now. Because of photon attenuation, the ‘‘front’’
180
◦ of data and the ‘‘back’’ 180 ◦ of data are not identical. In some cases,
it thus helps to use the full 360 ◦ of data; in others (i.e., when the organ
of interest—such as the heart—is located towards the front or the back),
it may be detrimental to image quality to use the full 360
◦ of data.
The increased sensitivity provided by multihead systems can be used pri-
marily in three ways. First, it can be used to decrease noise while using the same
acquisition time as with a single-head system. Second, it can be used to decrease
acquisition time to get the same counts as a single-head system; this decreased
acquisition time increases patient throughput, decreases motion (and associated
TABLE 9.1
Comparison of Acquisition Times and Relative Sensitivities for Single- and
Multihead Systems with Identical Camera Heads and Collimation
360◦ 180◦
Acquisition Relative Acquisition Relative
Times Sensitivities Times Sensitivities
Single 30 1 30 1
Double (heads@180
◦) 15 2 30 1
Double (heads@90◦) 15 2 15 2
Triple 10 3 20 1.5