278 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
EXAMPLE 8.6
We saw in Example 8.5 that use of a collimator with long holes can help to reject
Compton scattered photons and improve collimator resolution.
Question What is the change in sensitivity if we double the hole length and keep other
parameters ﬁxed?
Answer For simplicity, assume le = l. Then the sensitivity of a collimator is given
by (8.20):
ϵ =
( Kd2
le(d + h)
)2
.
If the collimator hole length is doubled, we have
ϵ′ =
( Kd2
2le(d + h)
)2
= ϵ/4 .
So by doubling the collimator hole length, we reduce the sensitivity by 75 percent.
Detector Efﬁciency A gamma ray may enter the detector crystal, fail to
interact with the crystal, and exit without depositing any energy. If no energy
is deposited, obviously no pulse will be generated. Scintillation detectors are
between 10 and 50 percent efﬁcient for electromagnetic radiation. The wide
difference in efﬁciencies is mostly the result of different designs trading off
efﬁciency, resolution, and target gamma ray energy.
The crystals used in Anger cameras vary from 10 to 25 inches in diameter
and from 1/4 to 1 inch thick. The thicker the crystal, the higher the probability
that an incoming photon will interact, deposit its energy, and be detected; thus,
the higher the sensitivity of the camera. The thicker the crystal, however, the
poorer the spatial resolution, due to the complex interaction between the crystal,
the PMTs, and the light pipe that is generally used to optically couple the two.
One-quarter-inch-thick crystals have about 1 mm better intrinsic resolution than
one-half-inch-thick crystals. When counting low-energy radionuclides such as
thallium-201, there is no difference in sensitivity. However, when counting
technetium-99m, one-quarter-inch-thick crystals have 15 percent less sensitivity
than one-half-inch-thick crystals. At higher energies, the difference in sensitivity
is even more signiﬁcant.
8.4.3 Uniformity
Field uniformity is the ability of the camera to depict a uniform distribution of
activity as uniform. At one time, it was thought that nonuniform response arose
from changes in sensitivity across the crystal. To correct the nonuniformity, a
uniform ﬂood or sheet source of radioactivity was imaged and recorded, and
used as a reference. Clinical images were corrected during acquisition by either
adding counts to the image in areas where the ﬂood had too few counts relative
to the other areas or by subtracting (i.e., purposely not recording) counts in
areas with too many counts.