Part II Radiographic Imaging 105
being fully absorbed. In the case of projection radiography, the detector is
sometimes a piece of ﬁlm, which then also serves as the display device. Increas-
ingly often, the detector is a digital device that is capable of storing a latent
image of the x-rays that hit the detector and either instantly or after a delay
transmitting the latent image to a computer. In the case of computed tomog-
raphy, an x-ray tube with a collection of detectors on the opposite side of the
patient rotate together around the patient, producing x-ray images at a number
of angles. These images, stored in a computer, form the projection dataused to
reconstruct cross-sectional or transaxial images through the patient.
Projection radiography is perhaps the most commonly performed medical
imaging approach. It is used any time a physician needs an image of structures
within the body, especially to obtain an overall picture of the torso and to
examine bones. It is also commonly used during and after orthopedic surgery to
verify the placement of artiﬁcial joints and various ﬁxation devices, as shown in
Figure II.2.
CT is distinguished from projection radiography in that it removes overlay-
ing structures by reconstructing cross sections of the body rather than imaging
projections. CT also produces images with lower resolution than conventional
radiographs, and typically requires higher x-ray dose to the patient. Figure II.3
shows various CT images of the human body.
Modern CT scanners invariably acquire stacks of two-dimensional cross
sections which can be handled by a computer as a three-dimensional (3-D)
dataset. Because of this capability, CT images can be reformatted by the
computer into arbitrary cross sections that are different than those that are
natively acquired by the scanner. All of the images in Figure II.3 are reformatted
with the exception of II.3(d). For example, in the large sagittal image shown in
Figure II.3(c) the data were acquired axially while sliding the patient on a table
through the axially-oriented CT scanner.
Figure II.3(d) shows a cross section of the chest (including the heart in which
all four chambers can be identiﬁed). The fact that the blood appears bright—as
bright as bone—is because a contrast agent has been introduced. Also, it might
be noticed that many of the bones appearing in these images have a bright ring
around them, which appears somewhat similar to that of radiographs. Because
the structures are not superposed in CT, this ring appearance actually reﬂects
differences in the make-up of the tissues. In this case, cortical bone has a higher
attenuation than cancellous bone and bone marrow, and is therefore brighter
on these images.