Part III Nuclear Medicine Imaging 237
of different radiotracers routinely available in nuclear medicine, there are literally
hundreds of different nuclear medicine studies, each of which assesses the
function of a different physiologic process or organ system within the body. The
technology of nuclear medicine permits direct measurements to be made of body
processes in humans that in the past could be examined only in experimental
animals. In order to most accurately depict the biodistribution of radiotracers,
instrumentation that emphasizes high image quality and quantitative accuracy
has been developed. Digital image processing plays an important role in nuclear
medicine, not only in image enhancement but also in extraction of quantitative
information about physiological function.
Nuclear medicine is used whenever a physician needs information on
physiologic or biochemical function. For example, the two most common nuclear
medicine procedures are bone scanning and myocardial perfusion imaging. Bone
scanning, as shown in Figure III.1(a), looks at the metabolic activity of bones; this
is complementary to the structural (anatomical) information from a projection
radiograph (e.g., Figure III.1(b)). A projection radiograph can show a fracture;
a bone scan can show active metabolism during the healing process. Similarly,
coronary angiography (a projection radiography technique), which depicts the
anatomy of the coronary arteries, shows the vessels that supply blood to the
heart muscle, whereas myocardial perfusion imaging shows the distribution of
blood ﬂow in the muscle. Figure III.2 illustrates the use of nuclear medicine
to depict myocardial perfusion. The images show the distribution of a speciﬁc
radiotracer that distributes in heart muscle according to blood ﬂow. The left
ventricle of the heart has the greatest blood ﬂow and is by far the most prominent
Figure III.2
Myocardial perfusion
imaging via SPECT. Top
four rows: short axis
slices. Next two rows:
horizontal long axis
slices. Bottom two rows:
vertical long axis slices.
Image courtesy of Harvey
Ziessman, MD, Johns
Hopkins University and
Hospital.
