192 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
Figure 6.5
The geometry of a
fourth-generation (4G)
CT scanner.
rotational motion and highly parallel detection capability, however, allows for
a dramatic decrease in scan time. A typical scanner acquires 1,000 projections
with a fan-beam angle of 30–60 degrees incident upon 500–700 detectors and
does this in 1–20 seconds. As in 2G systems, the detectors of a 3G system
are collimated to reduce scattering artifacts, so there is some loss of detector
collection efﬁciency. Furthermore, since the detectors must be very small, they
cannot be as efﬁcient as those in 1G and 2G systems. Therefore, once again, to
obtain the same image quality with a 3G scanner as that obtainable in 1G and
2G systems, the dose must be slightly greater.
A fourth-generation (4G) scanner, as shown in Figure 6.5, has a single
rotating source with a larger ring of stationary detectors. A variation on this
theme has the source outside the detectors with slight gaps between the detectors
through which the x-rays can be ﬁred. Collimation cannot be used in this
geometry since a detector must receive energy from a source that moves through
many positions. Because the detectors are not collimated and because they can
be physically large since they lie on a large ring, the detection efﬁciency of a
4G scanner is higher than that of a 3G scanner. However, because the detectors
cannot be collimated, they are also highly susceptible to scattering. This factor
is so signiﬁcant that the image quality in 4G systems is only comparable to that
of 3G systems, not better.
One major design feature shared by the ﬁrst four generations of CT scanners
is the presence of only one x-ray tube. This feature is primarily due to the fact that
x-ray tubes are expensive and bulky and that they must be constantly calibrated.
The need to rotate a bulky object—x-ray tube and/or detectors—limits the
overall imaging speed of the scanner.Fifth-generation (5G) scannersare designed
to solve this problem. Fifth-generation CT scanners, also known aselectron beam
computed tomography(EBCT) scanners, are commercially available at this time
but are not in widespread clinical use because of their high cost. EBCT uses
a ﬂying electron beam, steered electromagnetically, to hit one of four tungsten
anode strips that encircle the patient. X-rays are generated when the electron