284 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
where d is the collimator hole diameter and l is the collimator hole
length. Assume h = 0.2 mm. What values of l and d should be chosen
for the resolution and sensitivity of the collimator to be 7.8 mm and
28.9 × 10−4, respectively?
(c) Describe the advantage(s) and disadvantage(s) of making the holes
longer (with no other changes to the design).
(d) Can you compensate for the longer holes by changing the scintillator
in any way?
8.3 A photon that has undergone Compton scattering has both changed its
direction of ﬂight and lost some energy. Pulse height analysis is used
to reject these scattered photons during nuclear imaging. A pulse height
window is symmetrically set around the photopeak of the pulse height
spectrum. The full width of this window is usually expressed as a percent
of the photopeak energy.
(a) Calculate the maximum angle through which a 140 keV photon can
be scattered and still be accepted within a 20% offset window centered
at 150 keV.
(b) What are the maximum acceptable scattering angles for 140 keV and
364 keV photons if 20% windows centered at photopeak are used.
(c) Draw a conclusion about the ‘‘directional selectivity’’ of an Anger
camera as a function of energy.
8.4 Consider an Anger camera with only one parallel collimator hole. The mea-
sured intensity is the energy deposited on the camera per unit time per unit
area. Suppose the hole diameter is d, and a point source with radioactivity
of A is at a distance of r from the camera, directly below the hole.
(a) What is the measured intensity?
(b) What is the measured intensity if we double the hole diameter?
(c) What is the measured intensity if we double the source–camera
distance?
8.5 Photons can penetrate (i.e., go through) a collimator’s septa, which means
that a photon entering one collimator hole can sometimes be detected under
another hole. Here we consider the effect of septal penetration on collima-
tor design and collimator resolution. Let the hole diameter bed, the septal
thickness be h, and the hole length be l. Ignore Compton scattering—that
is, photons go straight—and ignore the scintillator thickness.
(a) What is the minimum distancew through a septum that the photon can
pass under the condition that it enters one hole and is detected in the
adjacent one? Simplify your expression by assuming that l ≫ 2d + h.
(b) Suppose we desire septal thickness to be large enough to stop 95% of
the photons that pass through the minimum distancew. What inequal-
ity should h satisfy? [Use the simpliﬁed expression from part (a)].
(c) How does septal penetration inﬂuence collimator resolution?
8.6 A radioactive pellet containing a 140 keV gamma ray emitting substance
with activity A mCi is placed 1 m away from an Anger camera such
that one-fourth of its total disintegrations hit the detector. Assume
t
1/2 = 6 hours. Assume that the Z-pulse height—that is, the photopeak—
is equal to the energy of the incident photon.