4.5 Attenuation of Electromagnetic Radiation 121
contrast is created in radiography modalities. Although this is actually a sta-
tistical process, we study attenuation here as though it were deterministic. In
Chapter 5, we will include the statistical aspects in a very natural way, as we
study noise in projection radiographs.
4.5.1 Measures of X-Ray Beam Strength
In radiography, we are generally concerned with a brief burst of x-rays, also
c a l l e da nx - r a ybeam. For many reasons, we are also concerned with the
‘‘strength’’ of the x-ray burst. For example, in the design of x-ray detection
systems used to form images, it is critical to characterize the strength of the
x-ray beam in order to characterize the inherent noise in the system and to adjust
the dynamic range of the detection system. Measures of x-ray beam strength
are also used in estimating the (adverse) biological effects of ionizing radiation.
This is critical because ionizing radiation is potentially harmful. At high doses,
it can cause burns or cataract formation, for example. Even at low doses, it can
increase the risk of cancer. It turns out that there are many ways to deﬁne and
measure the strength of x-rays. In this section, we consider several of the most
common and important measures of x-ray beam strength.
The conceptually simplest measure of the strength of an x-ray burst is simply
the number of photons N in the burst. It is also important to consider the area
over which these photons are spread. Accordingly, we deﬁne thephoton ﬂuence
/Phi1as the number of photons N per unit area A,
/Phi1= N
A , (4.13)
where the area is oriented at a right angle to the direction of the radiation beam
propagation. It is sometimes important to account fortime, since measurements
may take place over a ﬁxed interval /Delta1t. Accordingly, photon ﬂuence rate φ is
deﬁned as
φ = N
A/Delta1t . (4.14)
It may be of interest to know how much energy the burst is carrying and
could deposit into a material if totally absorbed. If each photon in the burst has
the same energy hν—that is, the beam is monoenergetic—then the total energy
of the burst is simply Nhν. We then deﬁne the energy ﬂuence /Psi1and energy
ﬂuence rateψ as
/Psi1= Nhν
A , (4.15)
ψ = Nhν
A/Delta1t . (4.16)
The energy ﬂuence rate is also known as the intensity of an x-ray beam, and it
is often given the symbol I. From (4.14) and (4.16), we see that
I = Eφ , (4.17)
where E = hν. Intensity has units of energy per unit area per unit time.