9.2 Image Formation 313
Attenuation Correction Unlike SPECT, PET has a straightforward approach
for handling attenuation. Suppose μ(x, y) is exactly known. Then, using (9.20),
we can form attenuation-corrected measurements as
gc(ℓ, θ) = n(ℓ, θ)
K exp
{∫ R
−R
μ(x(s′), y(s′);511 keV) ds′
}
. (9.25)
We see by combining this equation with (9.20) thatgc(ℓ, θ) is exactly the integral
of activity along the line L(ℓ, θ)
gc(ℓ, θ) =
∫ R
−R
f (x(s), y(s)) ds . (9.26)
Corrected measurements can now be used to obtain a more accurate image of
activity concentration. Here is the CBP formula that could be used, for example:
ˆf (x, y) =
∫ π
0
∫ ∞
−∞
gc(ℓ, θ)˜c(x cos θ + y sin θ − ℓ) dℓdθ. (9.27)
As in both CT and SPECT, ˜c(ℓ) is an approximate ramp ﬁlter, deﬁned using
an appropriate window function [see (9.11)]. Although CBP ignores both the
blurring caused by the physical size of the detectors (larger than x-ray CT) and
the statistical noise made prominent by the relatively low photon counts, it
remained the routine method in PET reconstruction for many years.
We see from (9.25) that it is only the line integrals of μ(x, y) that are
required to correct the PET counts, not an actual image of μ(x, y). So actual
reconstruction of μ(x, y) need not be carried out; instead, it is sufﬁcient to
simply measure the line integrals of attenuation on each LOR in order to be
able to compute the corrected measurements g
c(ℓ, θ). As noted above, it is
now standard to acquire CT data along with the PET data, using a combined
PET/CT system. The CT data are converted to μ(x, y) (at 511 keV) via a
nonlinear transformation, from which the line integrals of μ(x, y) (at 511 keV)
are obtained. We note that in PET/MRI systems, the MR data cannot be readily
converted to μ(x, y). Instead, current approaches rely on preexisting databases
that convert MR-identiﬁed anatomic structures to μ(x, y) (at 511 keV) via
segmentation and atlas-based methods.
9.2.3 Iterative Reconstruction
CBP was for many years the most commonly used reconstruction algorithm in
SPECT and PET, and it is still often used. It can be efﬁciently implemented and
is relatively robust to those physical factors present in ECT imaging that corrupt
the imaging process—for example, limited detector resolution, Compton scatter,
attenuation (at least in SPECT), and noise. However, use of CBP is optimal
(and, indeed, analytically correct) only if the imaging equation is an accurate
depiction of reality, which we know from the preceding discussion for both
PET and (especially) SPECT is not the case because of the corrupting physical