10 Chapter 1 Introduction
shown in Figure 1.2(b) is a slice through the liver; the data used to reconstruct
this image were acquired in just one second. Computed tomography is described
in more detail in Chapter 6.
1.6 Nuclear Medicine
Nuclear medicine imaging is distinguished from all other medical imaging
modalities by the fact that images can only be made when appropriate radioactive
substances are introduced into the body. These substances, which are either
injected, ingested, or inhaled into the body, are trace amounts of biochemically
active drugs whose molecules are labeled with radionuclides that emit gamma
rays. These so-called radiotracers move within the body according to the body’s
natural uptake of the biological carrier molecule. For example, radioactive
iodine can be used to study thyroid function. A nuclear medicine image reﬂects
the local concentration of a radiotracer within the body. Since this concentration
is tied to the physiological behavior of the carrier molecule within the body,
nuclear medicine imaging is an example of afunctional imagingmethod, whereas
standard CT and MRI are anatomical or structural imagingmethods.
There are three modalities within nuclear medicine: conventional radionu-
clide imagingor scintigraphy, single-photon emission CT(SPECT), and positron
emission tomography (PET). Conventional radionuclide imaging and SPECT
typically utilize a special 2-D gamma ray scintillation detector called an Anger
camera. This camera is designed to detect single x-rays or gamma rays, rather
than simply detecting the intensity of a collective beam as in projection radiogra-
phy and CT. In conventional radionuclide imaging, this camera is conceptually
analogous to the ﬁlm or digital detector in projection radiography. A complica-
tion is that this procedure combines the effects of emission with the effects of
attenuation of the rays by intervening body tissues, producing images that are
2-D projections of the 3-D distribution of radiotracers (which we wish to know)
confounded by attenuation.
SPECT and PET produce images of slices within the body. SPECT does
this by rotating the Anger camera around the body. Since the Anger camera is
a 2-D imager, SPECT is fundamentally a 3-D imaging technique. In conven-
tional radionuclide imaging and SPECT, a radioactive atom’s decay produces
a single gamma ray, which may intercept the Anger camera. In PET, however,
a radionuclide decay produces a positron, which immediately annihilates (with
an electron) to produce two gamma rays ﬂying off in opposite directions. The
PET scanner looks for coincident detections from opposing detectors in its
ring, thus determining the line that passes through the site where the annihila-
tion occurred. Both SPECT and PET use computed tomography reconstruction
techniques including iterative reconstruction in order to create diagnostic images.
A SPECT scanner is shown in Figure 1.3(a). The Anger camera at the top
(and side) is capable of rotating completely around the patient, who lies on
the table. The table can move in coordination with the camera (for a helical
tomographic scan), or the table can move with a stationary camera (for a
whole-body standard projection scan). The collection of SPECT images shown
in Figure 1.3(b) are cardiac scans taken at different spatial positions in the heart
depicting blood ﬂow to the heart muscle. Nuclear medicine imaging is described
in more detail in Chapters 7 through 9.