320 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
both photons must escape the patient and be detected in coincidence, meaning
that the total attenuation path length is longer for coincidence imaging than for
SPECT. This distinction increases exponentially with patient size. For example,
with PET, a 30 cm diameter patient requires an average attenuation correction
factor of 16, whereas a 40 cm diameter patient requires a correction factor of 50.
For comparison, the attenuation correction factor in cardiac SPECT imaging,
where the photons pass through 20 cm of tissue, is just 20.
As discussed above and formalized in (9.25) and (9.27), in PET an exact
correction for attenuation can be made, while such is not the case in SPECT.
In both SPECT and PET, scatter is usually estimated at the projection level
by use of a model of the scattering process that incorporates characteristics of
the scanner and the patient. This estimate is used to correct for scatter in the
reconstruction process.
9.3.3 Random Coincidences
In PET, random or accidental coincidences are possible. These occur when one
annihilation photon from one electron-positron annihilation event, and another
annihilation photon from a different electron-positron annihilation event are
detected in coincidence. Events A and D in Figure 9.11 depict random or
accidental coincidences.
The random coincidence count rate is given by the product of the coincidence
time window and the ‘‘singles’’ (individual) count rates from the two opposing
detectors in coincidence,
R = 2τS
+S− , (9.40)
where 2τ is the coincidence time window width andS+ and S− are the individual
count rates of opposing detectors.
As the activity in the ﬁeld of view increases, the true coincidence rate
increases linearly (ignoring dead-time effects), but the random coincidence rate
increases as the square of the increase in activity. Sensitivity may be increased
by increasing the width of the coincidence time window (up to the point when
the full coincidence time spectrum has been included), but only at the expense
of acquisition of more random coincidences. A great challenge in coincidence
imaging is to balance sensitivity (true coincidences) with random coincidences in
optimizing the time window setting. Some manufacturers specify the window in
terms of the time resolution of the system; others do so in terms of twice the time
resolution, which is usually the actual window width, and therefore the more
traditional speciﬁcation. The timing window, which typically ranges between 2
and 20 ns, is primarily determined by the ‘‘speed’’ of the detector material.
In practice, random or accidental coincidences are estimated from the
observed projection data through use of (9.40) and then incorporated in the
reconstruction process. As an alternative, an offset coincidence time window (in
which the window is intentionally offset by a large time lag, such that any and
all observed coincidences must be random) can be used to directly measure the
random coincidence rate.
9.3.4 Contrast
In the process of considering the effects of ﬁnite spatial resolution and scatter,
we noted their inﬂuence on image contrast in SPECT and PET. In both cases,