6.3 Image Formation 201
Figure 6.9
(a) An object and (b) its
sinogram.(a) (b)
p
u
0
to a projection comprising vertical lines. There is no need to proceed further in
angle, since these projections are redundant.
There are other interesting features in Figure 6.9(b). It is possible to see
sweeping features that run vertically through the sinogram. These features are
actually sinusoidal in character, and if the sinogram were ‘‘turned on its side,’’
they would be described by sinusoidal functions. This is the origin of the
name sinogram. It is straightforward to show that these features correspond to
individual objects in the image; the Radon transform of small points in the image
corresponds to (vertical) sinusoids in the sinogram. There are also accumulations
of bright white spots in certain rows of the sinogram in Figure 6.9(b). Upon
careful inspection of the image in Figure 6.9(a), it is apparent that these bright
spots correspond to the alignment of bright spots on parallel lines in the
projection at these speciﬁc angles. In other words, the regular alignment of
features in the image along certain directions gives rise to periodic bright spots
in the projections, which are revealed as organized features in the sinogram.
Although the sinogram is certainly understandable, it could never be argued
that it represents an image of the object. Clearly, it is necessary to take the data
represented in the sinogram and process them so that they look like the cross
section from which they came. This is the process of reconstruction, which we
now begin to develop.
Backprojection Let g(ℓ, θ) be the 2-D Radon transform off (x, y), and consider
the projection at θ = θ0. In general, there are an inﬁnite number of functions
f (x, y) that could give rise to this projection; hence, we cannot determine f (x, y)
uniquely from a single projection. Intuition tells us that if g(ℓ, θ0) takes on a
large value at ℓ = ℓ0, then f (x, y) must be large over the line (or somewhere on
the line) L(ℓ0, θ0). One way to create an image with this property is to simply
assign every point on L(ℓ0, θ0) the value g(ℓ0, θ0). When we repeat this for all ℓ,
the resulting function is called a backprojection imageand is given formally by
bθ (x, y) = g(x cos θ + y sin θ, θ) . (6.13)
The backprojection image b30◦ (x, y) for the example in Figure 6.9 is shown in
Figure 6.10(a).
Loosely speaking, the backprojection image at angle θ0 is consistent with
the projection at angle θ0, but its values are assigned with no prior information