5.2 Instrumentation 139
5.2.2 Filtration and Restriction
The bremsstrahlung x-rays that are generated within the anode do not all enter
the patient, and not all that enter the patient end up leaving the patient. In this
section, we discuss modiﬁcations to the x-ray beam that take place before the
x-rays enter the body. Filtration is the process of absorbing low-energy x-ray
photons before they enter the patient. Restriction is the process of absorbing
the x-rays outside a certain ﬁeld of view. We now discuss these processes
in detail.
Filtration The maximum energy of the emitted x-ray photons is determined
by the tube voltage. For example, if the tube voltage is 100 kVp, then the
maximum photon energy is 100 keV (recall the deﬁnition of eV). However, there
is a spectrum of lower energy x-ray photons that represent bremsstrahlung, as
shown in Figure 5.5. The top line depicts the theoretical spectral distribution of
bremsstrahlung radiation (normalized to 0.5 at 50 keV). The intensity ‘‘spikes’’
also shown in Figure 5.5 are characteristic radiations, and they are due to
electrons making transitions between speciﬁc electron shells in the anode atoms
(as discussed in Chapter 4). Because the x-ray photons emitted from an x-ray
tube have a distribution of energies, the x-ray sources used in medical imaging
systems are polyenergetic.
In practice, it is very undesirable for low-energy photons to enter the body,
as these photons are almost entirely absorbed within the body, thus contributing
to patient radiation dose but not to the image. There are three important ﬁltering
processes in a projection x-ray machine that reduce the number of low-energy
x-ray photons that enter the body (see Figure 5.5). First, the tungsten anode
itself absorbs a large fraction of low-energy x-ray photons before they even
leave the anode. Second, the glass housing of the x-ray tube and the dielectric
oil that surrounds it ﬁlter out more low-energy photons. This effect might be
accentuated over time since aging x-ray tubes tend to accumulate a tungsten ﬁlm
on the inside of the housing due to vaporization of the ﬁlament during repeated
heating. These ﬁrst two processes are referred to as inherent ﬁltering since they
are caused by the x-ray tube itself.
The third x-ray ﬁltering process is called added ﬁltering, since it arises
from metal placed in the x-ray beam outside of the tube. The most common
material used to ﬁlter x-rays is aluminum (1–3 mm thick), which is considered
the standard x-ray ﬁlter material. Other ﬁlter materials are often rated in
terms of the equivalent aluminum (Al/Eq) that would have to be used to
achieve the same attenuation. For higher energy systems, copper might be
used because it yields more attenuation for an equivalent actual thickness of
aluminum. Note that copper must be followed by aluminum in order to attenuate
the 8 keV characteristic x-ray photons created within the copper. Another
ﬁltering effect comes from the silvered mirror placed within the collimator (as
discussed in the next section). This might provide an additional 1.0 mm Al/Eq of
ﬁltering.
Figure 5.5 shows a progressive shift in the position of the spectrum ‘‘to the
right’’ (i.e., to higher average energies) as the beam passes through successive
materials. This increase in the beam’s ‘‘effective energy’’ (see Example 4.4) is
called beam hardening. Beam hardening is caused by the preferential absorption
of lower energy photons, for which the attenuation is higher in most materials