8.3 Image Formation 265
by (xk, yk). Suppose the amplitudes of their response to a scintillation event are
given by ak, k = 1, ... , K. These heights are viewed as representing samples of a
2-D distribution of light, and the location of the maximum of this distribution
represents the position (X, Y) of the event.
We could set ( X, Y) equal to the location of the PMT having the largest
amplitude, but that would provide only a very crude estimate of the location,
yielding a resolution on the order of the size of a tube. Instead, scintillation
cameras implement a center of mass calculation to estimate (X, Y). To calculate
the center of mass of the tube responses, we ﬁrst form1
Z =
K∑
k=1
ak , (8.1)
which represents the mass of the event’s light distribution. This signal is also
proportional to the total light output from the scintillation event (called the
Z-pulse) and is used in the pulse height analysis circuit, as previously discussed.
Given the total mass Z, the components of the center of mass ( X, Y)a r e
calculated as
X = 1
Z
K∑
k=1
xkak , (8.2)
Y = 1
Z
K∑
k=1
ykak . (8.3)
These three values (X, Y, Z) represent the ‘‘heart’’ of an Anger camera. Together,
they provide the location ( X, Y) of the scintillation event and the total light
output Z—or, equivalently, the total energy—of the event.
It is worth making a couple of comments about this process. First, it should
be understood that theak’s are actually waveforms, short pulses arising from the
scintillation event causing the cascading electrons in each PMT. The individual
numbers X, Y, and Z represent values obtained at the peak of such pulses or
by integrating over a short time frame. Second, small signals occurring in PMTs
that are distant from the event can degrade the position estimates. Therefore,
a threshold circuit is added to permit only signals above a certain level to
contribute the estimates of X and Y.T h i sdiscriminator circuit does not apply
to the estimate of Z, which still uses the output of all PMTs. Do not confuse
this discriminator circuit with the pulse height gating circuit, which determines
whether the Z signal is in a range sufﬁcient to qualify the event as both a
non-Compton and nonmultiple event.
In a modern Anger camera, the event position estimation is implemented
digitally. In most camera designs, the output of each photomultiplier tube goes
directly to a separate analog-to-digital converter, typically with at least 16-
bit precision. Then, software embedded in programmable read-only memory
1In this and the following two equations, we use discrete summation instead of integration to
acknowledge the relatively small number of PMTs, photodiodes, or other signal outputs from a
camera.