PART
I
Basic Imaging
Principles
Overview
What does the human body look likeon the inside? The smart answer: It depends
on how you look at it. The most direct way to look inside the human body is to
cut it open, for example, through surgery. A reﬁnement of this procedure might
be to use an endoscope, essentially a light tube that is ‘‘threaded’’ through the
body, which conveys an image to a display device. Both methods offer direct
optical viewing, but also involve cutting the body, putting something in it, or
both. These are invasive techniques, which cause (potential) damage or trauma
to the body.
The beauty of medical imaging is that we can see inside the human body
in ways that are less invasive than surgery or endoscopy. In some cases—for
example, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound imaging—the
methods are completely noninvasive and risk-free so far as we know. In other
cases—for example, projection radiography, x-ray computed tomography (CT),
and nuclear medicine—there is some risk associated with the radiation exposure,
even though these methods are considered noninvasive as well.
Fundamentally, these medical imaging techniques mean that we do not need
to cut the body or put a physical device into it in order to ‘‘see inside.’’ Of perhaps
even greater importance, these techniques allow us to see things that are not
visible to the naked eye in the ﬁrst place. For example, functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) allows us to obtain images of organ perfusion or
blood ﬂow, and positron emission tomography (PET) allows us to obtain
images of metabolism or receptor binding. In other words, the various imaging
techniques allow us to see inside the body in different ways—the ‘‘signal’’ is
different in each case and can reveal information which the other methods
cannot. Each of these different methods is a differentimaging modality, and the
‘‘signals’’ that arise are intrinsically different. This hearkens back to the opening
question: What does the human body look like on the inside? The answer: It
depends on the measured signal of interest.