CHAPTER
66
Computed
Tomography
6.1 Introduction
A tomogram is an image of a plane or slice within the body. A conventional
radiograph is 2-D, but it is not a tomogram because its data do not arise from
a single plane. X-ray computed tomography (CT) is extremely popular because
it generates images of slices of the body, thereby eliminating the artifacts of
overlaying structures that dominate conventional radiographs. A typical CT
scanner is shown in Figure 6.1. One way to think about the basic mechanism of
CT is to imagine taking a series of conventional chest x-rays, where the patient
is rotated slightly around an axis running from head to foot between each
exposure. Each developed ﬁlm contains a 2-D projection of the 3-D body, but
because they are each exposed at a different angle, there is different information
in each one. In fact, each horizontal line within a ﬁlm gives a 1-D projection of a
2-D axial cross section of the body at that angle. Thus, a collection of horizontal
lines, one from each ﬁlm at the same height, contains information about only
one axial cross section. These projection data are then used to reconstruct
cross-sectional images—tomograms.
What can we say about the tissues in an axial cross section from a collection
of 1-D projections taken at different angles? Fortunately, we can say a great deal,
and this is the basic premise of CT. The transformation that takes 1-D projections
of a 2-D object over many angles is called the 2-D Radon transform, and it has
a mathematical inverse. That is, given a collection of projections we can, in the-
ory, reconstruct the axial cross section exactly. Practical implementation of the
inverse 2-D Radon transformis accomplished in every CT scanner in one fashion
or another. Therefore, after studying how a CT scanner acquires these projec-
tions (after all, taking a collection of chest x-rays is hardly practical), we will
study in detail the 2-D Radon transform and its theoretical and practical inverse.
The advent of x-ray CT in the mid-1960s and its development all the way
up to the present day has produced a profound change in the role of diagnostic
imaging in medicine. A wide variety of medical conditions is visible in CT images
that are not visible in conventional radiographs. Thus, diagnosis and monitoring
186