182 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
(c) Determine the image of the phantom on the detector plane.
(d) Determine the minimal value of w such that the images of the two
lines on the detector plane can be distinguished from each other.
5.24 A slab of soft tissue with one blood vessel running in the middle is imaged
using an x-ray imaging system, as shown in Figure P5.6. For ease of
computation, assume the tissue and the vessel both have square-shaped
cross sections; the dimensions are shown in the ﬁgure. Assume that the
x-ray source produces N
i = 4 × 106 photons at either 15 keV or 40 keV,
and the photons are uniformly shed upon the side of the tissue.
Figure P5.6
Figure for Problem 5.24.
0.5 cm
2.0 cm
NtNi
The linear attenuation coefﬁcients μ of the soft tissue, blood, and a radio-
graphic contrast agent at two energy levels are given in the table below.
Linear Attenuation Coefﬁcient (cm−1)
Energy(keV) Soft Tissue Blood Contrast Agent
15 4.0 3.0 5.0
40 0.4 0.2 20
Ignoring photon noise, detector efﬁciency, beam divergence, scattering,
path length, and magniﬁcation effects:
(a) Determine the total number of exiting photons at the two energy
levels respectively. At which energy level are more photons absorbed?
(b) Calculate the local contrast of the blood vessel (target) at each energy
level. At which energy level is the local contrast of the blood vessel
better?
(c) Suppose the contrast agent whose linear attenuation coefﬁcient is
given in the table were injected into the blood vessel. Would you
expect there to be much difference in the local contrast at 15 keV
after injection? How about at 40 keV? (No calculations are needed;
just use mathematical reasoning.)
(d) Explain why it is expected that the linear attenuation coefﬁcient of
the contrast agent is much larger at 40 keV than at 15 keV?
5.25 An x-ray imaging system is shown in Figure P5.7 to image a bar phantom.
The detector is placed on the z = 0 plane. The bar phantom with two
dark bars is placed on the z = z
0 plane, and the x-ray source is placed