12 Chapter 1 Introduction
Figure 1.4
(a) An ultrasound scanner
and (b) an ultrasound
image of a kidney.
Source: Courtesy of GE
Healthcare.
 (a) (b)
An ultrasound imaging system is shown in Figure 1.4(a). In addition to
being inexpensive, ultrasound systems are small; most systems are on wheels,
and can be rolled to the bedside or wherever needed. Very compact systems with
limited functionality comprising just a transducer and a tablet or a smart phone
are currently being marketed. Two transducers are shown in the ﬁgure, with
their connecting cables; only one is used at any given time. Transducers with dif-
fering frequencies and geometries are usually available to serve the examination
requirements. The ultrasound image shown in Figure 1.4(b) shows a human kid-
ney. The textured appearance of ultrasound images is called speckle, and it is a
form of artifact. Ultrasound imaging is described in detail in Chapters 10 and 11.
1.8 Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance (MR) scanners use the property of nuclear magnetic reso-
nance to create images. In a strong magnetic ﬁeld, the nucleus of the hydrogen
atom—a proton—tends to align itself with the ﬁeld. Given the vast numbers of
hydrogen atoms in the body, this tendency results in a net magnetization of the
body. It is then possible to selectively excite regions within the body, causing
groups of these ‘‘little magnets’’ to tip away from the magnetic ﬁeld direction.
As the protons return back into alignment with the ﬁeld, they wobble like
children’s tops. Because protons are charged particles, this precession generates
an RF electromagnetic signature, which can be sensed with an antenna.
There are many modes in which an MR scanner can operate; these scanners
are incredibly ﬂexible imaging devices. The most general categories of operation
are the following:
• Standard MRI, which includes a whole host of pulse sequences (time-series
of different excitation pulses)
• Echo-planar imaging (EPI), which utilizes specialized methods to generate
images in real time
• Magnetic resonance spectroscopic imaging(MRS), which records images of
other nuclei besides that of the hydrogen atom
• Functional MRI (fMRI), which uses oxygenation-sensitive pulse sequences
to image blood oxygenation in the brain, which can be related to brain
activity