1.10 Summary and Key Concepts 13
Figure 1.5
(a) An MR scanner and
(b) an MR image of a
human knee.
Source: Courtesy of GE
Healthcare.
(b)
(a)
• Diffusion MRI (dMRI), which images the degree and orientation of molec-
ular diffusion in tissue
We mainly discuss standard MRI in this book, and brief descriptions of fMRI
and dMRI are also provided.
An MR scanner is shown in Figure 1.5(a). Surrounding the tube in the
center of the picture, within the housing, is a 3 tesla superconducting magnet.
The ﬁeld is very uniform within the bore, which is required for geometrically
accurate imaging. The MR image in Figure 1.5(b) shows a cross section of a
human knee. MRI is discussed in detail in Chapters 12 and 13.
1.9 Multimodality Imaging
Different medical imaging modalities reveal different properties of the human
body. As a result, it is often useful to obtain diagnostic images of a single
patient and medical condition using multiple modalities. For example, one
might look at bones using CT and soft tissues using MRI, or one might examine
brain structure using MRI and brain function using PET. Combining CT and
PET is particularly useful because PET provides functional information that
complements the structural information provided by CT and also because the
CT data can be directly used to improve the reconstructed PET images. Because
of this, virtually all modern PET systems are sold as PET/CT systems that
combine the two modalities within a single platform.
1.10 Summary and Key Concepts
In practice, radiologists look for speciﬁc patterns in medical images. These
patterns depend on both the patient and the imaging modality. It is the job of
the engineers and scientists who develop medical imaging systems to produce
images that are as accurate and useful as possible; these systems depend on
the physics of each modality. In this chapter, we presented the following key
concepts that you should now understand:
1. Medical imaging relies on noninvasive techniques to image body structures
and function.