146 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
a linear ‘‘scan’’ of the patient. Because the x-ray beam is collimated to a thin
line, the amount of scatter generated is small, and because the detector is also
collimated to a thin line, the amount of scatter accepted is small. Hence, these
systems can provide greater than 95% scatter reduction, at the expense of a
more complex and costly system and longer exposure times.
5.2.5 Film-Screen Detectors
In 1895, Roentgen discovered x-rays and made the ﬁrst radiograph by allowing
the x-rays to directly expose a photographic plate. X-rays can directly expose
today’s modern photographic ﬁlm, but this is a very inefﬁcient way to create
a radiograph. In fact, only about 1–2 percent of the x-rays are stopped by the
ﬁlm, so creating radiographs by direct ﬁlm exposure requires an unnecessarily
large x-ray dose to the patient.
To greatly improve their efﬁciency, ﬁlm-based diagnostic x-ray units always
have intensifying screenson both sides of the radiographic ﬁlm. The intensifying
screens stop most of the x-rays and convert them to light, which then exposes
the ﬁlm. This is a very efﬁcient process, and the screens cause only a small
amount of additional image blurring.
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the process of luminescence, and the
composition and dimensions of modern intensifying screens. We then describe
the optical properties of radiographic ﬁlm. Finally, we conclude with a discussion
of the radiographic cassette, which holds the intensifying screens and the ﬁlm.
Intensifying Screens A cross section of a typical radiographic intensifying
screen is shown in Figure 5.10. Since screens are used on both the front and
back of the radiographic ﬁlm, all parts of the screen except the phosphor must
be uniformly radiolucent. The phosphor is the active part of an intensifying
screen; its purpose is to transform x-ray photons into light photons. The light
photons then travel into the ﬁlm, causing it to be exposed and to form a latent
image. The latent image is the ‘‘virtual’’ image resident in the ﬁlm, but it is not
yet viewable by an observer.
The base of the screen is provided for mechanical stability, but it must be
somewhat ﬂexible so that it can be pushed tightly against the ﬁlm. It is typically
made of polyester plastic. The reﬂective layer is provided so that light from the
phosphor is reﬂected back into the ﬁlm rather than getting lost in the base. It is
typically about 25 μm thick and made of magnesium oxide or titanium dioxide.
A plastic protective coating is applied to the ﬁlm side of the screen to protect it
from repeated ﬁlm loading and unloading.
Phosphors are examples of materials that are luminescent; that is, they
convert one form of energy, in this case x-rays, into light. Two types of
luminescence are distinguished:ﬂuorescence, in which the emission of light takes
Figure 5.10
Geometry of an
intensifying screen.
Base
Reflective layer
Phosphor
Protective coating
1000 /H9262m
150-300 /H9262m
Film