88 Chapter 3 Image Quality
Figure 3.16
(a) Size distortion in a
radiographic imaging
system due to
magniﬁcation: although
the sizes of the two dark
objects are different, their
projections are the same.
(b) Shape distortion in a
radiographic imaging
system due to x-ray beam
divergence: although the
two dark objects are the
same, the shapes of their
projections are different.
(a)
X-ray source
(b)
X-ray source
artifacts that appear in each particular imaging modality will be discussed in
subsequent chapters.
3.7.2 Distortion
Medical imaging systems often introduce distortion, another factor affecting
image quality. Distortion is geometrical in nature and refers to the inability of a
medical imaging system to give an accurate impression of the shape, size, and/or
position of objects of interest.
In projection radiography, for example,size distortioncan be present due to
magniﬁcation caused by the distance of the x-ray source from the object being
imaged. This is illustrated in Figure 3.16(a). Notice that although the sizes of
the two dark objects are different their projections are the same.
On the other hand, shape distortioncan be generated as a result of unequal
magniﬁcation of the object being imaged. One common cause of shape distortion
is the fact that anatomical structures lie at different levels within the human body.
In projection radiography, shape distortion is also caused by the divergence of
the x-ray beam. This is illustrated in Figure 3.16(b). Notice that although the
two dark objects are the same the shapes of their projections are different.
Unfortunately, distortion can be very difﬁcult to determine and correct.
In order to evaluate distortion, knowledge of the actual shape and size of
the object being imaged is required. Moreover, a good understanding of the
imaging geometry is necessary. Developing methods for correcting distortion
is very important for increasing image quality and improving diagnosis. Dis-
tortions introduced by each particular imaging modality will be discussed in
later chapters.
3.8 Accuracy
The preceding discussions in this chapter have focused on quantitative metrics
of image quality. Even so, we said at the outset that image quality ultimately
must be judged in the context of a speciﬁc clinical application. Medical images