304 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
ﬁelds, and radio frequency signals from the MRI portion of the system interfere
with PMTs and some of the PET electronics, which adversely affect the PET
images. In addition, the PET detectors may produce inhomogeneities in the MRI
magnetic ﬁeld, as well as electromagnetic interference, both of which adversely
affect the MR images.
Several approaches are being used to address these challenges, including
using two separate scanners with a common patient bed (akin to the conven-
tional PET/CT approach, which yields a very long gantry), integrating the PET
detectors in the MRI scanner and guiding the scintillation light to an enclo-
sure outside the MRI system proper, using a custom magnet architecture, and
using new approaches to PET detectors, including the substitution of avalanche
photodiodes for PMTs.
9.2 Image Formation
In considering reconstruction in emission tomography, we focus on the recon-
struction of a 2-D cross-sectional image from observations of line integrals
within the cross section. This approach is consistent with SPECT (with suitable
approximation) and 2-D PET. It is completely analogous to our development of
CT reconstruction methods in Chapter 6, upon which we draw heavily.
9.2.1 SPECT Image Formation
Coordinate Systems Our ﬁrst task is to set up a convenient (and conventional)
coordinate system. Since the Anger camera rotates in SPECT, it is necessary
to have both a laboratory (ﬁxed) coordinate system and a rotating coordinate
system; these are both shown in Figure 9.7. It is important to realize that
because of the requirement for rotation and to conform with our previously
deﬁned notation for tomographic reconstruction, the notation shown in this
ﬁgure differs from the ‘‘camera-centric’’ notation that we used for planar
scintigraphy in Chapter 8.
Applying the same approximations that we used in developing the imaging
equation for planar scintigraphy (see Section 8.3), we assume that the photon
Figure 9.7
Geometry of a SPECT
system.
Patient
R x
u
z
z
y
Gamma
camera