8.2 Instrumentation 259
Figure 8.3
A schematic of a
photomultiplier tube.
Dynodes
Focusing
grid
Photocathode
Light photons
1,200 V
Output signal
Anode
e/H11002
e/H11002
e/H11002
e/H11002
These photoelectrons are accelerated to the ﬁrst dynode, an electrode that
is positively charged and positioned at a short distance from the photocathode
(see Figure 8.3). For each electron reaching the ﬁrst dynode, 3–4 electrons
are released. The second dynode has a higher voltage than the ﬁrst; thus, the
electrons liberated from the ﬁrst dynode are accelerated to the second dynode.
Each of these electrons in turn liberates three to four electrons from this second
dynode. This process is repeated at 10–14 successive dynodes in the PMT,
and 10
6 to 108 electrons reach the tube’s anode (i.e., the ﬁnal, most positively
charged electrode) for each electron liberated from the photocathode.
These electrons comprise the output of the PMT, and they form a current
pulse. The PMT outputs such a pulse each time a gamma photon interacts and
deposits energy in the NaI[Tl] crystal, triggering the sequence of events in the
tube as just described. This current pulse is directed into a preampliﬁer circuit,
which ampliﬁes the signal to provide a voltage pulse with a peak voltage—that
is, its pulse height—that ranges from a few millivolts to a few volts.
As stated above, an array of PMTs covers the back of the crystal. This
array means that light produced in the scintillation crystal is detected no matter
where it is produced. An array is also necessary to produce the signals used
in event positioning. The original Anger camera had seven PMTs, but modern
gamma cameras have anywhere from 37 to 91 tubes or more, often arranged
in a hexagonal pattern, as shown in Figure 8.4. Generally, more PMTs mean
better spatial resolution and image uniformity, but this comes with a higher
initial cost, more difﬁcult calibration procedures, and more costly maintenance.
The number of tubes is determined by the size and shape of both the crystal
and each individual PMT. The tubes must be smaller, of course, when there are
more of them arrayed over the scintillation crystal. Early PMTs had round cross
sections, whereas current PMTs often have hexagonal cross sections to better
‘‘tile’’ the scintillation crystal without gaps between tubes.