300 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
thicker, which increases positioning uncertainty. Because of this and because of
the inefﬁcient angular acquisition, dual-head SPECT scanners are not an ideal
solution for PET, and commercial PET systems based on this approach have not
been available for a long time.
Full-ﬂedged PET systems surround the patient with multiple rings of detec-
tors, each having a diameter of about 100 cm, as shown in Figure 9.5. Each
detector is electronically coupled to every other detector in a comprehensive
ACD circuit. Older systems used a single scintillation crystal coupled to a PMT
as the basic detector. The requirement for better resolution, however, has led
to the development of so-called detector blocks that are based on the Anger
camera principle. As an example, each detector block might comprise a single
scintillation crystal backed by four PMTs, which are arranged in a 2× 2 matrix,
as illustrated in Figure 9.6. The scintillation crystal is cut into an array of smaller
crystals, typically 8 × 4, 8 × 7, or 8 × 8 arrays, which partially isolate the light
burst from each scintillation event to one of these subcrystals. Relative PMT
signal heights are used to identify which of the subcrystals contained the event
in a crude approximation of the center of mass calculation, as in a conventional
Anger camera (see Problem 9.7).
With the block detector approach, a full PET scanner consists of a number
of these blocks. As an example, a PET scanner might have three primary rings of
detectors with 48 detector blocks in each ring for a total of 144 detector blocks
(3 × 48). Each detector block has 64 subcrystals backed by four PMTs, which
means that we can also think of this PET scanner as having 24 rings (3 rings ×
8 subcrystals) and 384 detectors per ring (48 detector blocks × 8 subcrystals).
Figure 9.5
Geometry of a
multiple-ring PET system. Detector blocks
Multiple rings
Figure 9.6
Geometry of a PET
detector block.
Cuts in
crystal
BGO crystal
Four PMTs