310 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
coincidence events or counts along LORs passing through them than will regions
of low activity. The total number of coincidence counts along any given LOR
represents an integration of the total activity along that line. We note that it is not
possible to know the position along an LOR where the annihilation took place
(except for TOF-PET, which is not part of our development here). Therefore, the
measured number of counts on a particular line represents an integration of the
activity on that line. That is, like SPECT, PET measures line integrals of activity.
Imaging Equation Consider what happens at the site of a positron annihilation.
Two gamma rays are generated, and they ﬂy off in opposite directions. As in
SPECT, the gamma rays will have potentially different experiences. A gamma
ray can be absorbed in the body, be scattered, miss the detector ring, or hit a
detector in the ring (and we consider only 2-D PET here). As in the development
of our imaging equation for planar scintigraphy (which was also used in SPECT),
we ignore scattering and therefore assume that photons travel in straight lines.
Unlike planar scintigraphy and SPECT, each PET detector has a ﬁxed spatial
extent, and must be considered in pairs.
Consider a distribution of radioactivity within the body (or sample)
described by a radiotracer activity concentrationf (x, y, z). Consider a differential
volume dxdydz lying halfway between the two detectors on a line connecting the
center of the detectors. For simplicity, we assume each detector is at a distance
R from this point. Since the radioactivity of this differential source is given by
(8.4), the photon ﬂuence rate at a point ( x
d, yd) on either detector (ignoring
attenuation for now) due to this differential source dA = f (x, y, z) dx dy dzis
dφ(xd, yd) = dA
4πR2 . (9.14)
Since photons in PET come in pairs, for each photon that hits one detector we
can expect a simultaneous hit on the opposite detector. But if either photon fails
to reach the detector because of attenuation the event will not be counted by
the PET system. This corresponds to a reduction in photon ﬂuence rate due to
attenuation.
To determine the factor associated with this reduction in ﬂuence, we can
carry out a brief ‘‘thought experiment.’’ Since for each annihilation both photons
must reach their target in order to be counted, the attenuation going both ways
matters. That is, the attenuation from s = 0t o s = R and s = 0t o s =− R both
can contribute to a reduction in the count. In fact, since the two paths are
colinear, the total attenuation seen by this pair of photons is the same that
would be experienced by a single photon originating at s =− R on a trajectory
through s = 0 and then on to s =+ R. The photon ﬂuence rate with attenuation
included can therefore be written as
dφ(x
d, yd) = dA
4πR2 exp
{
−
∫ R
−R
μ(s;E)ds
}
. (9.15)
It is the attenuation along the entire path that determines the loss factor
for coincidence detection. That is, it does not matter where on this line the
differential source is placed; the effect of attenuation on coincident counts will be
the same.