176 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Problems
Instrumentation
5.1 Examine the projection radiography system in Figure 5.13. Is this system
linear? Is it shift invariant?
5.2 (a) What determines the highest energy of x-ray photons emitted from
an x-ray tube? What determines the energy spectrum of the x-ray
photons?
(b) In radiographic imaging, why are low-energy photons undesired?
What measures can be taken to reduce the number of the low-energy
photons entering the human body?
(c) What is beam hardening? What are the causes of beam hardening?
5.3 We are designing an x-ray tube and want to use a lighter ﬁlter. Suppose we
have, in addition to copper, a new material with a density of 5,000 kg/m3
and a mass attenuation coefﬁcient of 0.08 m 2/kg at 80 kVp. In order
to satisfy the NCRP recommendation of 2.5 mm Al/Eq at 80kVp, what
should we use, copper or the new material? Explain.
5.4 (a) Why are iodine and barium commonly used as contrast agents?
(b) Explain with a diagram why an airgap can be used to reject scattered
photons. What is the main problem with airgaps?
5.5 (a) Why is Compton scattering bad for the images produced using projec-
tion radiography?
(b) For a ﬁlm with a given H&D curve, why is it better to have a range of
x-ray exposures that are in the linear region of the curve?
(c) Why do we have to ﬁlter x-rays from the x-ray source?
(d) Lead strips can be used (e.g., in a grid) to reduce scatter in radiography
systems. If the height of the grid is eight times its width, what is the
maximum scatter angle of the photon after which the photon cannot
pass through the grid? (Assume an orientation that is orthogonal to
the grid lines.)
Image Formation
5.6 Suppose a chest x-ray imaging system with a perfect point source can
provide images with acceptable quality when the intensity variation is
smaller than 5% when imaging a slab of material with uniform attenuation
coefﬁcient. Suppose the source-to-detector distance is 2 m, what is the
maximal size of the image?
5.7 (a) Derive a simple expression for the magniﬁcation of a thin object on a
projection radiograph. Assume x-ray source-to-object and source-to-
detector distances.
(b) In practice, what simple strategies can an x-ray technician use to reduce
the magniﬁcation and distortion effects of the projection radiography
system?
5.8 You are designing a digital x-ray detector panel with an array of discrete
detectors. You decide that you are able to compensate for the beam