2.3 Systems 25
The linearity assumption leads to a class of relatively simple systems, which are
tractable and enjoy a number of useful properties. Linearity is thus a critical
assumption used in this book.
How reasonable is the assumption of linearity in practice? Are linear systems
good mathematical approximations of the physical phenomena underlying med-
ical imaging? It turns out that many medical imaging systems are approximately
linear. In practice, this means that the image of an ensemble of signals is (nearly)
identical to the sum of separate images of each signal, which is considered next.
2.3.2 Impulse Response
We now investigate how a linear system responds to an arbitrary input signal
f (x, y) and demonstrate the fact that linearity leads to tractable systems. How-
ever, before we pursue this investigation, it will be beneﬁcial to ﬁrst consider the
output of a system S to a point impulse. Let us denote byh(x, y;ξ, η) the output
of system S to input δ
ξη (x, y) = δ(x − ξ, y − η) [that is, a point impulse located
at (ξ, η)]. In this case,
h(x, y;ξ, η) = S[δξη (x, y)] . (2.32)
In general, this output depends on four independent variables; it is therefore a
four-dimensional signal. The response h(x, y;ξ, η) is known as the point spread
function (PSF) of system S, or, equivalently, the impulse response function.
Let us now assume thatS is a linear system. Iff (x, y) is an arbitrary input to
S, then by starting with (2.30) and applying (2.6), (2.31), and (2.32), the output
g(x, y) will be given by
g(x, y) =
∫ ∞
−∞
∫ ∞
−∞
f (ξ, η)h(x, y;ξ, η) dξdη. (2.33)
The integral in (2.33) is known as the superposition integral. This equation
shows that the PSF h(x, y;ξ, η) uniquely characterizes a linear system; that is,
we only need to know the PSF of a linear system in order to calculate its output
in response to a given input.
In fact, (2.33) facilitates computation of the outputg(x, y) from an arbitrary
but known input f (x, y). If the PSF h(x, y;ξ, η) is known for every ( x, y, ξ, η),
then this computation reduces to calculating the double integral in (2.33). In
practice, however, knowing the PSF for every ( x, y, ξ, η) is a formidable task,
since this either requires that h(x, y;ξ, η) is known analytically, which is true
only in limited circumstances of usually no practical interest, or thath(x, y;ξ, η)
is experimentally measured and stored in numerical form, which is usually
not practical due to the four-dimensional nature of h(x, y;ξ, η). Therefore,
additional simpliﬁcation is needed at this point, which may be achieved by
imposing additional conditions on system S.
2.3.3 Shift Invariance
An additional simplifying assumption is shift invariance. A system S is shift-
invariant if an arbitrary translation of the input results in an identical translation