166 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Figure 5.21
A typical MTF for a
ﬁlm-screen detector.
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.01 0.1 1.0 10.0
MTF
Spatial frequency (cycles/mm)
phosphors—that is, the active parts of intensifying screens. For each x-ray
photon that is absorbed by a phosphor (by photoelectric absorption), a large
number of lower-energy light photons are produced. Unlike x-ray photons,
these light photons are efﬁciently detected by ﬁlm emulsions (see Section 5.2.5).
The light photons travel (approximately) isotropically from the point where the
x-ray was absorbed, as shown in Figure 5.20. They can then be absorbed in the
ﬁlm at locations far from the x-ray’s path. The union of detected light photons
form a ‘‘spot’’ on the ﬁlm, which is effectively an impulse response to the x-ray
‘‘impulse.’’ Using superposition, an imaging equation incorporating ﬁlm-screen
blurring is readily derived. To good approximation, it is simply (5.28) with an
additional convolution with the ﬁlm-screen impulse response function h(x, y),
I
d(x, y) = cos3 θ
4πd2m2 s(x/m, y/m) ∗ tz(x/M, y/M) ∗ h(x, y) . (5.29)
Typically, the impulse response of a ﬁlm-screen detector system is circularly
symmetric. The modulation transfer function (MTF) of a typical ﬁlm-screen
detector is shown in Figure 5.21.
Use of a thinner phosphor yields less ﬁlm-screen blurring. However, thin
screens do not stop as many x-rays, reducing the efﬁciency of the detector
system. Detector efﬁciency η is deﬁned as the fraction of photons captured by
the detector on average. Calcium tungstate is often used for intensifying screens
because it has reasonably good efﬁciency for stopping x-ray photons (η ≈ 0.30).
In general, the thicker the screen, the higher the efﬁciency and the worse the
resolution. We will see in Section 5.4.1 that maintaining high efﬁciency is key
to keeping image noise low. Thus, while thinner screens are desirable for good
resolution, there is a tradeoff below which the improvements in resolution will
be offset by increased noise.
Digital detectors have different mechanisms that produce blurring at the
detector. Like ﬁlm-screen blurring, there are effects derived from the thickness
of the scintillators (when used). In addition, there is the effect in some systems
of discrete detector ‘‘bins’’ that accumulate charge over speciﬁc regions within
the detector. To a ﬁrst approximation, all digital systems can be modeled by the
convolution model in (5.29) but each having their own unique PSF h(x, y).
5.3.4 Film Characteristics
As noted in Section 5.2.7, computed radiography and digital radiography sys-
tems are replacing conventional ﬁlm-screen approaches. Even so, it is important