262 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
due to the random nature of the Compton scatter angle. The rightmost limit of
this plateau, called theCompton edge, represents Compton interactions in which
the incoming (unscattered) gamma photon is backscattered 180 ◦ in the crystal,
thus depositing the maximum energy possible in a single Compton interaction.
The photopeak represents gamma photons that come directly from the source
without interacting and losing any energy and deposit all of their energy in
either a single photoelectric interaction or one or more Compton interactions
followed by a photoelectric interaction. Because a gamma photon cannot lose
all its energy in a single Compton scatter event, there is a separation between
the Compton plateau and the photopeak.
Of importance, scintillation detectors have imperfect energy resolution, as
discussed later in the chapter. As a result, the photopeak, which should be an
inﬁnitely thin vertical line, is spread. The degree of spreading is related to energy
resolution in exactly the same way as the point spread function is related to
spatial resolution.
EXAMPLE 8.2
The pulse height analyzer is used to reject photons that have been Compton scattered.
Question What is the maximum angle through which a 140-keV photon can be
scattered and still be accepted within a 20 percent pulse height window?
Answer Note that 20 percent pulse height window is 10 percent on either side.
Therefore,
140 keV × 0.1 = 14 keV ,
140 keV − 14 keV = 126 keV.
Since
hν′ = hν
1 + hν
m0c2 (1 − cos θ)
,
we have
126 keV = 140 keV
1 + 140 keV
511 keV(1 − cos θ)
.
Solving for θ yields θ = 53.54◦.
8.2.6 Gating Circuit
The Z-pulse is proportional to the total energy deposited in the crystal by the
gamma ray photon and is used by the pulse height analyzer to discriminate
against Compton-scattered photons. The pulse height analyzer is used to set
an acceptance window around the photopeak (the dominant energy for the
particular radiotracer being used), as shown in Figure 8.5(b). Its lower threshold
is set to discriminate against Compton events, which have lower energy than a
non-Compton event. Its upper threshold is set to discriminate against multiple
(simultaneous, summed) events, which have more energy than a single event
(and for which ‘‘position’’ is a meaningless concept). Because scintillation