122 Chapter 4 Physics of Radiography
In x-ray imaging, a photon burst is always polyenergetic, since it arises
mainly from bremsstrahlung. In principle, if only the photon count were impor-
tant, photon ﬂuence rate could still be used as a valid measure of radiation
strength. However, these measures are not very important in practice, since
photons are not counted in x-ray imaging modalities, but instead their total
energy is measured. It is more useful, therefore, to capture the idea of intensity
for polyenergetic sources.
Since each x-ray photon carries its own discrete energy, a plot of N as a
function of E for polyenergetic sources is aline spectrum. Because of the random
nature of bremsstrahlung, the ﬁne details of a line spectrum change with each
photon burst; however, the line density—for example, number of photons per
unit energy as a function of E—remains constant for a given source. The x-ray
spectrum S(E) is this line density per unit area per unit time. Examples of x-ray
spectra were shown in Figure 4.5. The energies at whichS(E) is large have larger
numbers of x-ray photons per unit energy.
Since the integral of a line density yields the number of lines, from the
deﬁnition of S(E) and (4.14), the integral of the spectrum yields the photon
ﬂuence rate
φ =
∫
∞
0
S(E′) dE′ , (4.18)
a quantity that does not depend on energy. Furthermore, by analogy to (4.17),
it is natural to deﬁne the intensity of a polyenergetic source as
I =
∫ ∞
0
E′S(E′) dE′ . (4.19)
EXAMPLE 4.4
It is often desirable to model a polyenergetic x-ray beam as a monoenergetic source.3
Question What energy would a (hypothetical) monoenergetic source have to be in
order to produce the same intensity as the (true) polyenergetic source using the same
number of photons?
Answer For a given area A and time interval /Delta1t, the number of photons in the
polyenergetic source is
Np = A/Delta1t
∫ ∞
0
S(E′) dE′ .
The intensity of the polyenergetic source is
Ip =
∫ ∞
0
E′S(E′) dE′ .
The equivalent monoenergetic beam has intensity
Ip = E Np
A/Delta1t .
3In a monoenergetic beam, all photons have the same energy, hν.