6 Chapter 1 Introduction
imaging. The concept of using radioactive tracers to study physiology was
introduced by George de Hevesy in 1923; de Hevesy is considered the father
of nuclear medicine. A radiotracer is a radioactively labeled drug that mimics
a biological compound of interest; the distribution of the radioactivity implies
the distribution of the drug. Early studies with radiotracers used conventional
nonimaging radiation detectors to roughly determine amounts of radioactivity
in various body regions. In 1949, Benedict Cassen at UCLA started the
development of the ﬁrst imaging system in nuclear medicine, the rectilinear
scanner. The modern Anger scintillation camera was developed by Hal Anger
at UC Berkeley in 1952. The element of the most commonly used radionuclide
in nuclear medicine, technetium-99m, was discovered in 1937 by Carlo Perrier
and Emilio Segre; its ﬁrst use in medicine was in 1961.
The interaction of acoustic waves with media was ﬁrst described by Lord
John Rayleigh over one hundred years ago in the context of the propagation
of sound in air. Modern ultrasound imaging had its roots in World War II
Navy sonar technology, and initial medical applications focused on the
brain. Ultrasound technology progressed through the 1960s from A-mode,
B-mode, and M-mode scans to today’s two-dimensional (2-D) Doppler,
three-dimensional (3-D), and nonlinear imaging systems.
The phenomenon of nuclear magnetic resonance, from which magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) arises, was ﬁrst described by Felix Bloch and Edward
Purcell; they shared the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physics. This work was extended
by Richard Ernst, who received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1991. In
1971, Raymond Damadian published a paper suggesting the use of magnetic
resonance (MR) in medical imaging; in 1973, a paper by Paul Lauterbur
followed. Lauterbur received the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 2003, along with
Peter Mansﬁeld, who developed key methods in MRI.
1.2 Physical Signals
In this book, we consider the detection of different physical signals arising from
the patient and their transformation into medical images. In practice, these
signals arise from four processes:
• Transmission of x-rays through the body (in projection radiography and CT)
• Emission of gamma rays from radiotracers in the body (in nuclear medicine)
• Reﬂection of ultrasonic waves within the body (in ultrasound imaging)
• Precession of spin systems in a large magnetic ﬁeld (in MRI)
Radiography, CT scanning, and nuclear medicine all make use of elec-
tromagnetic energy. Electromagnetic energy or waves consist of electric and
magnetic waves traveling together at right angles. Wavelength and frequency
are inversely related; frequency and energy are directly related. The electromag-
netic spectrum spans the frequency range from zero to that of cosmic rays;
only a relatively small portion of this spectrum is useful in medical imaging.
At long wavelengths—for example, longer than 1 angstrom—most electromag-
netic energy is highly attenuated by the body, prohibiting its exit and external
detection. At wavelengths shorter than about 10
−2 angstroms, the corresponding
energy is too high to be readily detected.