7.7 Summary and Key Concepts 251
Technetium-99m (Tc-99m) is by far the most commonly used gamma ray
producing radionuclide in nuclear medicine. It is easily generated on-site using
a generator containing molybdenum-99, whose radioactive decay (half-life is
67 hours) produces Tc-99m. Tc-99m can in turn be tagged to a variety of
molecules, including sulfur colloids, glucoheptonate, albumin macroaggregates,
and phosphates, which can be used to track a variety of physiological processes
in the body. Tc-99m has a half-life of 6 hours and a monoenergetic gamma
ray energy of 140 keV, which are both ideal in terms of balancing the various
radionuclide requirements. As we describe in the following chapters the instru-
mentation related to planar scintigraphy and SPECT, it will be useful to think
of Tc-99m as the radioactive source and to work out examples with this source
as well.
EXAMPLE 7.4
Consider an experiment that uses dual radionuclides, technetium-99m and thallium-201.
At t = 0, we have equal number of atoms of both radionuclides.
Question When will the count rate of technetium-99m be smaller than 20 percent of
the total count rate?
Answer The average number of photons from technetium-99m is given by
/Delta1NTc(t) = λTcN0e−λTct.
Similarly, for thallium-201, we have
/Delta1NTl(t) = λTlN0e−λTlt.
When the counts of technetium-99m are smaller than 20 percent of the total counts, we
must have
4/Delta1NTc(t) ≤ /Delta1NTl(t).
From Table 7.1, we know λTc = 0.693/6h r−1 and λTl = 0.693/73 hr−1. Solving the
above equation, we have
t = 36.65 hr.
7.7 Summary and Key Concepts
Nuclear medicine makes use of radiotracers (compounds that are chemically
labeled with radioactive atoms), which depend on the radioactive decay of
radionuclides. The choice and behavior of speciﬁc radionuclides signiﬁcantly
inﬂuences the utility of the radiotracer. In this chapter, we presented the
following key concepts that you should now understand:
1. Nuclear medicine produces images that depict the distribution of a radio-
tracer; this distribution is governed by body function, not structure.
2. Nuclear medicine makes use of radionuclides; these are unique nuclear
species representing radioactive atoms, which emit ionizing radiation upon
(spontaneous) decay.