1.4 Projection Radiography 7
In this book, we express energy in units of electron volts (eV), where
1 eV is the amount of energy an electron gains when accelerated across 1 volt
potential. We will concentrate on electromagnetic radiation whose wavelengths
correspond to energies of roughly 25–500 keV.
Ultrasound imaging utilizes sound waves, and considerations of attenuation
and detection are similar to those above. Image resolution is not adequate when
wavelengths longer than a couple of millimeters are used, and attenuation is
too high for very short wavelengths. An ideal frequency range for ultrasound in
medical imaging is 1–20 MHz, where 1 Hz = 1 cycle/second.
The signal in MRI arises from the precession (like the motion of a child’s
top or dreidel) of nuclei of the hydrogen atom—that is, protons. When placed
in a large magnetic ﬁeld, collections of protons, termed spin systems, can be
set into motion by applying radio frequency (RF) currents through wire coils
surrounding the patient. Although these spin systems precess at RF frequencies
(64 MHz is typical), the primary signal source is not from radio waves, but from
the Faraday induction of currents in the same or different wire coils.
1.3 Imaging Modalities
The medical imaging areas we consider in detail in this book are projection
radiography, CT, nuclear medicine, ultrasound imaging, and MRI. An imaging
modality is a particular imaging technique or system within one of these
areas. In this section, we give a brief overview of these most common imaging
modalities.
Projection radiography, CT, and nuclear medicine all use ionizing radiation.
The ﬁrst two transmit x-rays through the body, then use the fact that the body’s
tissues selectively attenuate (reduce) the x-ray intensities to form an image.
These are termed transmission imaging modalities because they transmit energy
through the body. In nuclear medicine, radioactive compounds are injected into
the body. These compounds or tracers move selectively to different regions or
organs within the body, emitting gamma rays with intensity proportional to
the compound’s local concentration. Nuclear medicine methods are emission
imaging modalities because the radioactive sources emit radiation from within
the body.
Ultrasound imaging transmits high-frequency sound into the body and
receives the echoes returning from structures within the body. This method is
often called reﬂection imaging because it relies on acoustic reﬂections to create
images. Finally, MRI requires a combination of a high-strength magnetic ﬁeld
and radio frequency Faraday induction to image properties of the proton nucleus
of the hydrogen atom. This technique is calledmagnetic resonance imagingsince
it exploits the property of nuclear magnetic resonance.
1.4 Projection Radiography
Projection radiography includes the following modalities:
• Routine diagnostic radiography, including chest x-rays, ﬂuoroscopy, mam-
mography, and motion tomography (a form of tomography that is not
computed tomography)