258 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
The magniﬁcation produced by converging and pinhole collimators is useful
in those cases when the object being imaged is signiﬁcantly smaller than the
ﬁeld of view of the camera and when the object’s size or the amount of detail
within the object challenges the intrinsic spatial resolution capabilities of the
system. With magniﬁcation, the image presented to the camera face is larger
than life-size. This means that detail that is smaller in the ‘‘real world’’ than
the resolving capability of the camera may possibly still be resolved, as long as
the actual physical size presented to the camera face is larger than the camera’s
intrinsic resolution. This same concept is what allows us to see small details
with a magnifying glass that are invisible to the unaided eye.
8.2.2 Scintillation Crystal
The scintillation detectoris the most commonly used detector in nuclear medicine
because it is more sensitive to electromagnetic radiation than a gas-ﬁlled detector.
This type of detector is based on the property of certain crystals to emit light
photons (scintillate) after deposition of energy in the crystal by ionizing radiation.
The most commonly used scintillation crystal in nuclear instrumentation is
sodium iodide with ‘‘thallium doping,’’ which is written as NaI[Tl]. Since
NaI[Tl] crystals absorb moisture from air, the crystals are hermetically sealed
in aluminum ‘‘cans.’’ Because the aluminum absorbs alphas and betas, NaI[Tl]
detectors are generally used only for the detection of x-rays and gamma rays.
The scintillation crystals in a gamma camera are typically 10–25 inches in
diameter and 1/4–1 inch thick. The thicker crystals are used for high-energy
gamma rays, while the thinner crystals are used for low-energy gamma rays. Of
course, any camera has only one crystal, so the user purchases a system with
a crystal thickness matched to his or her needs. Like the screens that are used
in projection radiography, thicker crystals stop more radiation than thinner
crystals, but they also have poorer spatial resolution—so there is a tradeoff
between efﬁciency and resolution just as there is in projection radiography. We
will have more to say about this later in the chapter.
8.2.3 Photomultiplier Tubes
Each gamma photon that interacts in the scintillation crystal (by a photoelec-
tric or Compton scattering process) produces a burst of light in the crystal,
comprising thousands of light (scintillation) photons. This light is reﬂected and
channeled out of the back of the crystal, through a glass plate and is incident
upon an array of photomultiplier tubes. Each photomultiplier tube (PMT),
shown in Figure 8.3, is a vacuum tube with two important components: a
sensitive front surface, called thephotocathode, and a series of electrodes, called
dynodes. The PMT serves two important functions: it converts a light signal
into an electrical signal and it ampliﬁes this electrical signal.
The front surface of a PMT has a transparent window through which light
travels in order to hit a photosensitive surface—the photocathode, an extremely
thin layer of an alloy such as cesium and antimony. For every four to ﬁve light
photons incident upon the photocathode, one electron is released or ejected
from the photocathode by the photoelectric effect.