Further Reading 175
5.5 Summary and Key Concepts
Projection radiography is the oldest and most fundamental medical imaging
modality. This modality uses x-ray tubes and either ﬁlm or digital detectors
to record images of the ‘‘shadow’’ created by body tissues. In this chapter, we
presented the following key concepts that you should now understand:
1. Projection radiographyproduces radiographs, which are 2-D projections of
3-D objects.
2. A projection radiography systemconsists of an x-ray tube, devices for beam
ﬁltration and restriction, compensation ﬁlters, grids, and a ﬁlm-screen or
digital detector.
3. The basic imaging equation describes the energy- and material-dependent
attenuation of the x-ray beam produced by the system as it passes through
the patient.
4. The basic imaging equation must be modiﬁed by several geometric effects,
including the inverse square law, obliquity, beam divergence, anode heel
effect, path length, and depth-dependent magniﬁcation.
5. The ﬁlm-screen detector produces anoptical image on ﬁlm; the degree of ﬁlm
blackening—the optical density—depends on ﬁlm exposure in a nonlinear
way characterized by the H&D curve.
6. Digital detectors convert x-rays by direct or indirect means to electronic
signals that can be read directly into a computer and viewed on a computer
display.
7. Noise arising from the random nature of x-ray production and transmission
reduces an image’s SNR, and thus the detective quantum efﬁciency of the
system.
8. Acceptance of Compton scattered photonsreduces both image contrast and
SNR.
Further Reading
Bushberg, J.T., Seibert, J.A., Leidholdt, E.M., and
Boone, J.M. The Essential Physics of Medical
Imaging, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins, 2012.
Carlton, R.R. and Adler, A.M. Principles of Radio-
graphic Imaging: An Art and a Science, 5th ed.
Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning,
2012.
Johns, E.J. and Cunningham, J.R. The Physics of
Radiology, 4th ed. Springﬁeld, IL: Charles C
Thomas Publisher, 1983.
Macovski, A. Medical Imaging Systems, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983.
Webster, J.G. Medical Instrumentation: Applica-
tion and Design, 4th ed. New York, NY: Wiley,
2009.
Wolbarst, A.B. Physics of Radiology, 2nd ed. Nor-
walk, CT: Appleton and Lange, 2005.