16 Chapter 2 Signals and Systems
distance of a particular ray from the center of the object, whereas θk is a
discrete-valued variable, representing the beam’s angle relative to a reference
coordinate system (see Chapter 6).
Based on the previous signal classiﬁcation, systems can also be organized
into categories. For example, we may consider a continuous-to-continuous
system that responds to a continuous signal by producing a continuous signal,
or a continuous-to-discrete system that responds to a continuous signal by
producing a discrete signal. For example, an analog-to-digital converter takes a
continuous signal as input and produces a discrete signal as output through a
process called sampling (see Chapter 3).
In this book, we consider one-dimensional (1-D), two-dimensional (2-D),
and three-dimensional (3-D) signals and systems. In this chapter, we primarily
develop 2-D continuous signals and systems; restriction to one dimension or
extension to three dimensions is straightforward in most cases. In all cases, you
can think of the input signal(to the imaging system) as coming from the patient
and the output signal as coming from the imaging system. The challenge in
medical imaging is to make the output signal a faithful representation of the
input signal.
2.2 Signals
A continuous signal fis deﬁned as a function
f (x, y), −∞ ≤ x, y ≤∞ (2.1)
of two independent real-valued variablesx and y. This signal can be represented
and visualized in two different ways. We may plot the signal as a function of
the two independent variables x and y, or we may display it by assigning an
intensity or brightness proportional to its value at ( x, y). This is illustrated in
Figure 2.1. In the ﬁrst case, we call f (x, y)a function or a signal and (x, y)a
point. In the second case, we call f an image and (x, y)a pixel, a word that
is derived from ‘‘ picture element.’’ The 3-D analog of the pixel is the voxel,
from ‘‘volume element.’’ This is illustrated in Figure 2.2. The representation in
Figure 2.1(a) is useful in mathematical calculations, while that in Figure 2.1(b)
is most appropriate for human observers. Accordingly, in this book, we focus
primarily on two-dimensional pixel-based representations.
A number of special signals will frequently be used throughout this book.
These include the point impulse, the comb and sampling functions, the line
impulse, the rect and sinc functions, and exponential and sinusoidal signals. In
addition, many signals will have properties that distinguish them from other
signals and make their use in analysis easier. Separability and periodicity are two
such common properties. We now study these special signals and properties.
2.2.1 Point Impulse
It is very useful in medical imaging to mathematically model the concept of a
point source, which is used in the characterization of imaging system resolution.
For example, if the source is very small, yet appears to be very large (blurred out)