The Physics of
Nuclear Medicine
CHAPTER
77
7.1 Introduction
Nuclear medicine relies on radiopharmaceuticals introduced into the body to
trace the spatial and temporal distribution of the underlying physiological
and biochemical processes that govern the radiopharmaceutical’s distribution.
Radiopharmaceuticals are usually introduced in very small quantities that do
not themselves affect the physiologic or biochemical processes. Radiopharma-
ceuticals are thus often called radiotracers, reﬂecting both the fact that they are
introduced into the body in trace quantities and that they trace body processes.
Radiopharmaceuticals consist of both a chemical compound (the ‘‘pharmaceu-
tical’’ portion of the word) and a radioactive atom (the ‘‘radio’’ portion of
the word). When the radioactive atom undergoes radioactive decay, a process
we describe below, radiation is emitted that leaves the body. External imaging
devices, such as scintillation cameras, record these radiation emissions com-
ing from the patient and produce either a planar, two-dimensional image or
cross-sectional, tomographic images.
Depending on the speciﬁc radiotracer, different physiological or biochemical
functions are imaged. This is strikingly different than projection radiography
or computed tomography. In these two transmission imaging modalities, while
the speciﬁc characteristics of the signal depend on speciﬁc imaging and instru-
ment parameters, the basic type of information does not change from image
to image; it depends on tissue attenuation characteristics, as we have dis-
cussed. In nuclear medicine, however, each different radiotracer produces a
depiction of a completely different physiological or biochemical function, so
the basic information itself is different. Further, since the radiation that forms
the basis of the image is not transmitted through the body, but arises from the
radioactive atoms within the body, nuclear medicine imaging is referred to as
emission imaging.
In this chapter, we consider the physical processes that give rise to radionu-
clides, radioactive decay, and the emissions that form the basis of nuclear
medicine imaging.
239