188 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
is necessary since it leads to the actual methods, implemented in software and
hardware, used in modern-day clinical scanners. As well, the same mathematics
and methods can be used in single photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT), positron emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI).
6.2 CT Instrumentation
The fundamental measurement required by a CT scanner is the measurement of
x-ray attenuation along a line between an x-ray source and an x-ray detector.
In order to reconstruct an image of a 2-D cross section, a collection of such
measurements are required along all lines within the cross section. Seven
generations of basic CT designs have been developed to obtain these fundamental
data. Roughly speaking, the seven generations were developed in sequence to
improve overall performance, mostly toward faster acquisition of both cross-
sectional and volumetric data. Although ﬁrst- and second-generation scanners
are no longer used in medical imaging, it is still important to understand their
geometry. In particular, the parallel ray geometry of ﬁrst-generation scanners is
used to explain the reconstruction formulas that underlie all CT scanners. As
we describe the CT generations, it may be helpful to refer to Table 6.1, which
compares various properties of CT scanners across the generations.
6.2.1 CT Generations
First-generation (1G) scannersare no longer manufactured for medical imaging,
but their geometry is still used to explain the theoretical ideas underlying image
reconstruction. The geometry of a 1G scanner is shown in Figure 6.2. It consists
of a single source, collimated (meaning that its beam is restricted) to a thin line,
and a single detector that move in unison along a linear path tangent to a circle
that contains the patient. After making a linear scan, the source and detector
apparatus are rotated so that a linear scan at a different angle can be made, and so
on. The 1G geometry has the advantage that an arbitrary number ofrays—that
is, paths between source and detector—can be measured within a given projec-
tion, and an arbitrary number of angular projections may be measured. It has
the further advantage that scattered radiation goes mostly undetected (because
it misses the detector), and therefore, the measured attenuation of the beam
is almost certainly due to tissues along the ray.
A second-generation (2G) scanner, as illustrated in Figure 6.3, has additional
detectors, forming a detector array, arranged along a line or a circle. As in the
1G scanner, the source and detector array move linearly in unison to cover
the ﬁeld of view (FOV). However, unlike the 1G scanner, the source in a 2G
scanner is collimated as a fan beam so that energy is kept within the slice but
spread over the detector array. Therefore, while the source and central detector
scan the same projection as the 1-D projection, the additional detectors are
simultaneously obtaining additional projections from different angles.
With the 2G scanner geometry, we can make a larger rotation after each
linear scan and thereby complete a full scan in less time, making the 2G
scanner faster. Scattering effects must be considered, however, in the design of