9.2 Image Formation 307
which we recognize from (9.7) as the line integral of activity concentration.
Therefore, using the impulse function [see (2.3)] and referring to (9.7), (9.8) can
be written as
g(ℓ, θ) =
∫
∞
−∞
∫ ∞
−∞
f (x, y)δ(x cos θ + y sin θ − ℓ) dx dy, (9.9)
which is precisely the form of the standard CT imaging equation [see (6.10)].
One important difference between the CT and SPECT cases is that the SPECT
imaging equation uses the actual photon counts with a simple scaling factor
in arriving at a Radon transform relation, while CT requires a logarithmic
transformation of the observed x-ray intensities.
Reconstruction Because of approximations made above, we can use the same
CBP reconstruction formula in SPECT as in CT [see (6.26)]
ˆf (x, y) =
∫ π
0
∫ ∞
−∞
g(ℓ, θ)˜c(x cos θ + y sin θ − ℓ) dℓdθ. (9.10)
This inverse formula is commonly used in SPECT even if only as a starting point
for iterative reconstruction (see Section 9.2.3).
In (9.10), ˜c is an approximate ramp ﬁlter, deﬁned in (6.27) and repeated
here for convenience:
˜c(ℓ) = F −1
1D{|ϱ |W(ϱ )} . (9.11)
In CT, the deﬁnition of the ramp windowing ﬁlter W(ϱ ) is not very critical.
As long as its cutoff frequency ϱ 0 is high enough, there will be very little
degradation in image quality. In SPECT, however, the windowing ﬁlter is very
critical to image quality. In particular, if it is chosen to allow too many high
frequencies through, then the SPECT images will be dominated by noise due to
the high-frequency emphasis of the ramp ﬁlter. If, on the other hand, W(ϱ )i s
chosen to pass only the very lowest spatial frequencies, then image detail will be
absent. It is common to use a ramp combined with some sort of low-pass ﬁlter,
such as a Butterworth ﬁlter, which is deﬁned as:
W(ϱ ) = 1√
1 +
(
ϱ
ϱ c
)2n
, (9.12)
where ϱ c is the ﬁlter’s critical or cut-off frequency andn is the order of the ﬁlter.
Attenuation Correction Attenuation inﬂuences the relative, as well as absolute,
apparent distribution of activity within an image; it is thus important to try to
correct for this effect even if only subjective visual interpretation—rather than
absolute quantiﬁcation—of the images is used. We used a simpliﬁed imaging
equation (9.7), which does not include the effects of attenuation, in order to
derive the convolution backprojection formula for SPECT that is given in (9.10).
This was necessary because the inﬂuences of the activity concentration f and