9.1 Instrumentation 299
Figure 9.4
Coincidence detection due
to positron decay and
annihilation.
Detector
Detector
Site of 
radioactive
decay
Positron
path
511 keV photon
511 keV photon
Electron
path
Annihilation
Event: Yes or no?
Coincidence
detection
circuit
It is possible to use a single-head Anger camera to individually detect just one
of the two 511 keV gamma ray photons that are emitted by positron-electron
annihilation. Images could then be created using planar scintigraphy or SPECT
reconstruction (if the camera rotates). With a multihead system, both photons
might be detected if two of the Anger cameras were 180
◦ apart and the photons
made it through the opposing collimators. In this case, scintigraphy or SPECT
techniques could be used to create an image as well.
However, it is more advantageous (and this is what distinguishes PET from
SPECT) to exploit the fact that a positron annihilation produces two gamma
rays at the same time. PET uses electronic circuits, as shown in Figure 9.4, to
detect a pair of 511 keV photons at the same time, in what is calledannihilation
coincidence detection (ACD). With this approach, only simultaneous gamma
rays are declared as events, and all other events are rejected. Whether two
detected photons are declared as ‘‘simultaneous’’ depends on a user-set time
interval, called a time window, which is typically 2–20 ns for modern scanners.
Of major importance, if two opposing detectors simultaneously detect
the (paired) 511 keV gamma rays, the annihilation event must have occurred
somewhere along the line joining the two detectors (the so-called coincidence
line). Said another way, ACD intrinsically provides information about the
direction of travel of the photons. Detector collimation is not required with
this approach and is in fact undesirable because it reduces the sensitivity of the
detectors and may cause undesirable directional dependencies if the detectors
remain in ﬁxed positions.
Commercial dual-head SPECT scanners could be used, together with ACD
circuitry, for PET (and some were sold this way in the early days of PET). In
this case, the two heads are placed 180
◦ apart and their collimators removed
(or replaced with special collimators that isolate axial planes only). The heads
must be rotated in order to pick up emissions from all angles around the
patient, as tomographic reconstruction methods are used to reconstruct cross-
sectional images (see Section 9.2). In order to efﬁciently stop 511 keV photons,
it is generally necessary to make the NaI(Tl) crystals (in the Anger cameras)