9.1 Instrumentation 297
Specialized Geometry SPECT Systems Several manufacturers have released
commercial SPECT systems that rely on a combination of more exotic detectors
and specialized geometry in an attempt to signiﬁcantly enhance imaging perfor-
mance, especially detection sensitivity. Many of these systems utilize a solid-state
detector, cadmium-zinc-telluride (CZT), which we mentioned in Section 8.2.8.
CZT has signiﬁcantly better energy resolution than NaI along with higher count-
rate capability. It can be manufactured as a pixelated detector; with 1 × 1m m
pixels, intrinsic spatial resolution < 2 mm can be achieved. The specialized
SPECT systems combine CZT or another detector material with unique collima-
tion approaches; for example, multiheads and a multipinhole array. A picture
of one such system is shown in Figure 9.2.
Some of these approaches involve movement of the detectors and/or colli-
mators; others do not. In all cases, the specialized geometry yields signiﬁcantly
higher detection sensitivity, by a factor of as much as eight, particularly for car-
diac imaging (for which many of these systems have been speciﬁcally optimized).
This increased sensitivity can be used to decrease dose, imaging time, and/or
image noise. All such unique approaches require specialized reconstruction
methods.
Combined SPECT/CT Systems As we have emphasized throughout this book,
each imaging modality yields a very different type of signal or signals, which
is why each is clinically useful and none are redundant. Nuclear medicine
images depict function (e.g., the activity of a physiological or biochemical
process) rather than structure or anatomy. However, the spatial resolution
in most nuclear medicine images is no better than several millimeters, and
the radiotracer’s distribution does not necessarily follow anatomical borders,
making anatomic localization difﬁcult. Accordingly, there has been a push in
emission tomography, especially in PET (as we shall see below) and also in
SPECT, to build combined systems that also incorporate CT. In such systems,
Figure 9.2
A GE Discovery NM
530c cardiac SPECT
system. Courtesy of GE
Healthcare.
