4.7 Summary and Key Concepts 131
that any dose of radiation increases the risk of getting cancer, with larger
doses proportionately increasing risk. Of importance, the physician and patient
together usually make the decision that the medical beneﬁts of the imaging
procedure outweigh any potential risks.
4.7 Summary and Key Concepts
Ionizing radiation is used in several imaging modalities, including projection
radiography and CT. The interaction of particulate radiation creates x-rays
used in these modalities; the interaction of the x-rays in the patient creates the
radiograph. In this chapter, we presented the following key concepts that you
should now understand:
1. Ionization is the ejection of an orbiting electron from an atom; ionizing
radiation has sufﬁcient energy to produce ionization.
2. Ionizing radiation may be particulate or electromagnetic; the main ionizing
radiations of interest in medical imaging are x-rays, gamma rays, energetic
electrons, and positrons.
3. Particulate ionizing radiation transfers energy via collisional transfer and
radiative transfer(which results in bremsstrahlung x-rays).
4. The probability of radiative transfer increases with increasing effective
atomic number of the material through which the particulate radiation
passes.
5. EM ionizing radiation transfers energy in medical imaging applications via
the photoelectric effector Compton scattering.
6. The probability of electromagnetic interactions depends on the photon’s
energy and the effective atomic number, density, and molecular weight of
the material through which the EM radiation passes.
7. Attenuation of the intensity of a beam of EM radiation by some material is
described by a monoexponential relation and is a function of the thickness
of the material and the linear attenuation coefﬁcient, which itself depends
on characteristics of the material and photon energy.
8. Radiation dose to tissues is characterized by effective dose, which itself
includes considerations of deposited energy, the biological effectiveness of a
given ionizing radiation, and the relative radiosensitivity of different tissues.
Further Reading
Attix, F.H.Introduction to Radiological Physics and
Radiation Dosimetry. New York, NY: Wiley,
1986.
Bushberg, J.T., Seibert, J.A., Leidholdt, E.M., and
Boone, J.M. The Essential Physics of Medical
Imaging, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins, 2012.
Carlton, R.R. and Adler, A.M. Principles of Radio-
graphic Imaging: An Art and a Science, 5th ed.
Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning,
2012.
Hubbell, J.H. and Seltzer, S.M. Tables of X-Ray
Mass Attenuation Coefﬁcients and Mass
Energy-Absorption Coefﬁcients , version 1.4.