5.3 Image Formation 159
Figure 5.15
Imaging a uniform slab.
Slab
Line
X-ray
origin
u
d
z0
detector, as shown in Figure 5.15. Assume a monoenergetic x-ray spectrum for
the present analysis. The central ray of the x-ray beam—that is, the ray that
goes through the center of the object and hits the detector origin—encounters a
net path length L through the object. Thus, the x-ray intensity at ( x, y) = (0, 0)
will be I
0 exp(−μL), where I0 is the intensity of the beam that would be present
at the detector origin if the slab were not present.
The x-rays propagating toward the detector point (x, y), however, experience
a different path length through the slab. The path length through the slab along
the line between the x-ray source and (x, y) is given by
L′ = L
cos θ . (5.10)
Since L′ > L, more x-rays will be attenuated along this line than along the
central path, and the x-ray intensity at the detector will be smaller. Ignoring the
inverse square law, obliquity, and the anode heel effect, the intensity is given by
Id(x, y) = I0e−μL/ cos θ . (5.11)
If the inverse square law and obliquity are included, then the intensity is given by
Id(x, y) = I0 cos3 θ e−μL/ cos θ . (5.12)
If the anode heel effect is compensated by ﬁltration, then (5.12) represents a
valid imaging equation for a homogeneous slab parallel to the image plane
within the ﬁeld of view.
The interpretation of radiographs, both visually and through automatic
image analysis techniques, should be informed by (5.12) and by the anode heel
effect (if not compensated). Since materials with larger attenuation are brighter
when viewed on a light box (or a computer screen if digitally displayed), these
effects will cause a shading artifactwithin a homogeneous object. This could be
interpreted as representing a different attenuation within the object or different
object thickness. It is truly an ambiguous situation. Radiologists are trained
to study radiographic intensities locally, and to not compare absolute image
values across the ﬁeld of view. This is not a desirable situation for automatic