PART
III
Nuclear Medicine
Imaging
Overview
In the preceding part of the book, we considered projection radiography and
computed tomography, two imaging modalities that rely on the transmission
of photons through the body to form images. We now turn our attention to
nuclear medicine, an imaging modality that relies on the emission of photons
from within the body.
In contrast to projection radiography and computed tomography, in nuclear
medicine, which we cover in this part of the book, the biological behavior of a
substance’s biodistribution in the body is of interest; each molecule of the sub-
stance is labeled with a radioactive atom. Here, the ionizing radiation emitted
when the radioactive atom undergoes radioactive decay is used to determine the
location of the molecule within the body; the ionizing radiation is of no medical
interest per se. Since the biodistribution of the radiolabeled substance—the
radiopharmaceutical or radiotracer—is determined by the body’s physiologi-
cal and biochemical functioning, nuclear medicine is considered a functional
imaging modality.
Figure III.1 makes this point. Figure III.1(a) shows a whole-body bone scan.
In this anterior view, image intensity is proportional to the distribution of
a radiotracer that reﬂects the metabolic activity of bone. (The radiotracer is
ultimately metabolized via the kidneys, which is why there is a hot spot of
activity in the urinary bladder in the middle of the image.) Figure III.1(b) shows
a stacked series of separate projection radiographs of the corresponding areas
(from different patients). In these images, as discussed in the previous part of
the book, image intensity reﬂects the varying absorption of transmitted x-rays
through bone and other tissues.
In general, a radiotracer is injected into a peripheral arm vein of the patient,
or the patient inhales or ingests the radiotracer. Specialized instrumentation
produces images of the internal distribution of radioactivity, which is assumed to
mirror the distribution of the compound of interest. These images are compared
with known distributions in different disease states. Because there are hundreds