Problems 177
divergence effect by weighting the outputs of your detectors appropriately.
This way, the effective beam intensity should be uniform throughout the
entire image.
(a) Assume your detectors are very small and very close together and that
the detector panel is a distance d away from the x-ray source. Find an
appropriate weighting (as a function of r
d) that will compensate for
the beam divergence variation.
(b) Do these adjustments improve the image quality? Explain.
5.9 Consider the radiographic image of the prism, as developed in
Example 5.4.
(a) Determine an expression for the intensity image Id(x, y)o ft h ep r i s m .
(b) Plot the intensity proﬁle along the line y = 0 on the detector plane.
(c) Write an expression for the image on the developed radiographic ﬁlm
of the prism.
5.10 Derive (5.28) from ﬁrst principles.
Image Quality
5.11 Assume that each photon incident upon an x-ray image intensiﬁer is
detected with probability (QE)p, independently from other photons. If the
number N(t) of photons that arrive at the detector within the time interval
[0, t) follows a Poisson distribution with mean μt, ﬁnd the probability
mass function (PMF) of the number D(t) of photons detected in the time
interval [0, t).
5.12 Consider two 1-D functions
h1(x) = e−x2/5 and h1(x) = e−x2/10.
(a) Suppose h1(x) is the PSF of the extended source in a projection
radiography system for an object at range z = 3d/4, where d is the
source-to-detector distance. What is the PSF of the extended source as
a function of z?
(b) In this same projection radiography system, the intensiﬁer screen
causes a blurring that can be modeled as h
2(x). Find the MTF of the
overall blurring as a function of source magniﬁcation, m.
(c) What is the FWHM of the system as a function of m?
5.13 We examine the effect on the SNR of an increase in the recorded scatter
fraction from 0.35 to 0.8. Suppose that a 1 mm-thick bone presents a
scatter-free subject contrast of 0.08, and suppose that 1,000 photons/mm2
were collected. What would happen if the detector absorption efﬁciency
were halved?
5.14 Show that the quantum efﬁciency QE of a detector is at least as large as
its DQE; that is,
DQE ≤ QE .