296 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
blur), and decreases tracer washout effects (which might lead to a mathemat-
ically inconsistent projection dataset). Third, it may be ‘‘traded’’ for higher
resolution through the use of higher resolution/lower sensitivity collimators.
EXAMPLE 9.1
Suppose a single-head system requiresN counts in a 30-minute scan using an all-purpose
collimator. Let us imagine performing the same study with a two-head system instead,
and let the two new collimators have higher resolution with just 75 percent of the
sensitivity of the all-purpose collimator on the single-head system.
Question How long will it take to achieve the same counts as the single-head system,
and will the image quality be equivalent?
Answer In 30 minutes, each (high-resolution) head collects 0 .75 × N counts (on aver-
age, of course). This corresponds to 2 × 0.75 × N counts in 30 minutes. The time t to
collect just N counts satisﬁes
t
30 minutes = N
2 × 0.75 × N ,
so
t = 30 minutes
1.5 = 20 minutes .
The image obtained in just 20 minutes will be better because, although the total counts
are the same in the two scans, the resolution is better in each of the dual-head collimators.
Multihead systems have permitted a wide variety of SPECT scans to be
performed in less than 30 minutes. This is an important time milestone because
beyond 30 minutes patient motion becomes a very signiﬁcant factor in image
quality. Three-head systems exist, and it would seem that M-head systems
(where M > 3) would be in the ofﬁng. However, simple geometric constraints
(packing that many heads in close to the patient), quality control issues (how
do you keep all those detectors in calibration?), and cost ( M heads means M
collimators and head components) make it impractical to go much further in this
design direction. For higher sensitivity, manufacturers have gone to specialized
geometries, as discussed below.
Studies have shown that Anger cameras must have signiﬁcantly better per-
formance for SPECT than for planar scintigraphy. For example, nonuniformity
must be reduced to less than 1% in order to avoid reconstruction artifacts. This
requires acquisition of a 30–120 million count reference image of a uniform
ﬁeld for subsequent computer correction of nonuniformities. (There should be
around 10,000 counts per pixel in order for the relative Poisson variation or
noise in the uniformity calibration to be < 1% (√
10,000/10,000), so a longer
reference scan is required for 128 × 128 acquisition versus 64 × 64 acquisi-
tion.) The camera image must also be mechanically properly aligned within the
computer matrix, or an axis-of-rotation correctionmade. In addition, there are
several other factors that must be accounted for to make SPECT truly quantita-
tive. In the past, there was disagreement about the need for attenuation, scatter,
and spatial resolution corrections for subjective visual interpretation of SPECT
images, but it is now generally accepted that such corrections are desirable for
both visual interpretation and quantitative analyses.