3.5 Signal-to-Noise Ratio 77
3.5.1 Amplitude SNR
Most frequently, the SNR is expressed as the ratio of signal amplitude to noise
amplitude:
SNRa = Amplitude(f )
Amplitude(N) . (3.58)
We refer to SNR a as the amplitude SNR. Notice that there are many ways
to specify what we mean by ‘‘signal’’ and ‘‘noise.’’ Moreover, exact def-
inition of the amplitude SNR depends on specifying what we mean by
‘‘signal amplitude’’ and ‘‘noise amplitude.’’ Thus, the amplitude SNR is case-
dependent, and its deﬁnition must be speciﬁcally adapted to the particular
situation at hand.
EXAMPLE 3.10
In projection radiography, the number of photons G counted per unit area by an x-ray
image intensiﬁer follows a Poisson distribution as in (3.52). In this case, we may consider
signal f to be the average photon count per unit area (i.e., the mean ofG) and noise N to
be the random variation of this count around the mean, whose amplitude is quantiﬁed
by the standard deviation of G.
Question What is the amplitude SNR of such a system?
Answer From (3.52) to (3.54), it follows that the amplitude SNR is given by
SNRa = μG
σG
= μ√μ = √μ. (3.59)
This quantity is known as the intrinsic SNR of x-rays, and we will have much more to
say about this in Part II of the book. This tells us something very important and practical:
The greater the average number μ of photons, the larger the amplitude SNR, and the
smaller the relative amplitude of random ﬂuctuations in G. Therefore, a higher x-ray
exposure generally improves the quality of radiographic images. Keep in mind, however,
that greater exposure to ionizing radiation means more risk of radiogenic cancer.
3.5.2 Power SNR
Another way to express the SNR is as the ratio of signal power to noise power:
SNRp = power(f )
power(N) . (3.60)
We refer to SNRp as the power SNR. Notice that exact deﬁnition of the power
SNR depends on specifying what we mean by ‘‘signal power’’ and ‘‘noise
power.’’ Thus, as with the amplitude SNR, the power SNR is case-dependent,
and its deﬁnition must be speciﬁcally adapted to the particular situation at hand.
EXAMPLE 3.11
If f (x, y) is the input to a noisy medical imaging system with PSFh(x, y), then the output at
(x, y) may be thought of as a random variable G(x, y) composed of signal h(x, y) ∗ f (x, y)
and noise N(x, y), with mean μN(x, y) and variance σ2
N(x, y).