158 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Answer The corner of the ﬁlm is distance rd away from the detector origin, where
rd =
√
72 + 8.52 = 11.0 in.
The cosine of the largest angle θ made by the beam is therefore
cos θ = d√
d2 + r2
d
= 72√
722 + 112
= 0.989 .
The smallest intensity ratio is therefore
Id
I0
= cos3 θ = 0.966 ,
which represents about a 3 percent variation. Given the other effects we will be
exploring—anode heel effect, path length, depth-dependent magniﬁcation, noise, and
scattering—this effect is a negligible intensity perturbation across the ﬁlm.
Anode Heel Effect We have heretofore modeled the beam coming from an
x-ray tube as having uniform intensity within a cone. The anode heel effect,
however, predicts a stronger intensity beam in the cathode direction and no
variation orthogonal to the cathode–anode direction. The reason for this effect
is due to the geometry of the anode, as shown in Figure 5.4. Although the
generation of x-rays within the anode is essentially isotropic at the atomic
level, those x-rays traveling out of the anode in the forward (cathode-to-anode)
direction have more anode material through which to propagate before leaving
the anode itself than those leaving the anode in the backward direction. Thus,
the beam intensity is higher in the cathode direction; the variation can be as
much as 45 percent intensity variation in the cathode to anode direction. Thus,
the anode heel effect far outweighs the effects of obliquity and inverse square
law in its overall effect on the uniformity of intensity across the detector surface.
The anode heel effect can be compensated by using an x-ray ﬁlter that is
thicker in the cathode direction than in the anode direction. If it is not compen-
sated by ﬁltration, then it must be recognized when positioning patients relative
to the x-ray tube. In particular, the anode heel effect should be used as a kind of
inherent compensation for natural gradients in the body’s x-ray attenuation pro-
ﬁle. For example, when imaging the foot, the toes should be positioned toward
the anode since that part of the foot is thinner; the cathode end will have more
x-rays to penetrate the thicker (proximal) part of the foot. This principle can be
applied throughout the body. In our development of x-ray imaging equations,
we will assume that the anode heel effect is compensated by ﬁltration.
Path Length Consider imaging a slab of material with a constant linear
attenuation coefﬁcient μ and thickness L arranged parallel to the plane of the