172 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
same thickness and linear attenuation coefﬁcients. They are capable of stopping
the same fraction of incident photons; their basic ‘‘stopping power’’ is the same.
Suppose that the output of a detected event is highly predictable in the ﬁrst
detector and highly variable in the second. We intuitively understand that the
ﬁrst detector is better. In order to more accurately characterize the quality of a
detector, we must account for these variations in detector output given a single
event. That is the goal of the parameter DQE.
Detective Quantum Efﬁciency To better characterize detector performance,
detective quantum efﬁciency (DQE) considers the transformation of SNR from
a detector’s input to its output. In this way, DQE moves away from simply
counting photons as in QE. The detective quantum efﬁciencyis deﬁned as
DQE =
( SNRout
SNRin
)2
, (5.40)
where SNRin is the intrinsic SNR of the incident radiation and SNR out is the
SNR of the measured quantity—for example, ﬂash of light, detector voltage,
ﬁlm density, etc. DQE can be viewed as a measure of the degradation in the SNR
due to the detection process. It can also be viewed as the fraction of photons
that are detected ‘‘correctly.’’ In general DQE ≤ QE ≤ 1.
EXAMPLE 5.6
Consider a hypothetical detector having QE = 0.5 and the ability to perfectly localize
every photon that is stopped by the detector.
Question What is the DQE of this detector?
Answer Suppose a photon burst with an average of N is incident upon the detector.
The SNR of the input is just the intrinsic SNR of the photon burst, which is given by
SNRin =
√
N .
Since QE = 0.5, we know that 0.5 × N photons (on average) are stopped by the detector.
These photons are perfectly localized, meaning that the detector produces an accurate
count of the number and position of all detected photons no matter what pixel resolution
is desired. Therefore, the output SNR is
SNRout =
√
0.5N ,
and the DQE is
DQE =
( SNRout
SNRin
)2
=
( √
0.5N√
N
)2
= 0.5 .
In this case, DQE = QE, which occurs because of the hypothetical perfect localization of
all detected photons.