308 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
the attenuation factors are not separable in (9.6), and therefore no closed form
solution exists to ﬁnd f from the observed pixel counts. However, once an
approximate image of f is reconstructed using (9.10), it is straightforward to
deduce a ﬁrst-order attenuation correction factor a(x, y) that can be applied to
improve the image appearance and quantiﬁcation.
Suppose we knew the linear attenuation coefﬁcient μ(x, y;E) on the plane
of interest (perhaps by measuring it using CT) and imagine that we could
distribute radioactivity uniformly—that is, f (x, y) = 1—throughout this object.
From (9.6) we can then compute the expected measurementsnk(ℓ, θ) that would
be theoretically produced by this object and then reconstruct an estimate of
this object using (9.9). Let us denote the reconstructed image of this artiﬁcial
uniform ﬁeld bya(x, y). We know that the values ofa(x, y) will be less than unity
since attenuation has been applied numerically. It will also be ‘‘cup shaped,’’
having lower values in the deep interior due to the higher overall attenuation.
Since we have incorporated the attenuation factors (inverse square law and linear
attenuation coefﬁcient) in computing the measurements, the reconstructed image
a(x, y) will be degraded by the same factors as the true activity distribution that
we are trying to reconstruct. In the case of the simulation, we know the ‘‘truth’’
f (x, y) = 1 can be achieved by simply dividing a(x, y)b yi t s e l f .
As a ﬁrst-order correction, we can therefore apply the same correction factor
to our actual reconstructed image, yielding the attenuation compensated image
ˆf
c(x, y) =
ˆf (x, y)
a(x, y) . (9.13)
Although (9.13) looks on the surface to be a valid correction method—and it
is better than nothing—it is only an approximation because the inverse Radon
transform is not theoretically exact for this problem since the observation
equation (without approximation) is not a pure line integral. The notion of
computing the expected observations is a very powerful concept, however,
and it forms the basis of iterative reconstruction methods (see Section 9.2.3) in
which attenuation correction can be incorporated iteratively and with theoretical
justiﬁcation.
Any attenuation correction approach requires knowledge of the distribution
of the linear attenuation coefﬁcients. This distribution is usually obtained from
a transmission dataset. That dataset may come from either a CT (e.g., in a
combined SPECT/CT system) or from scanning line sources (e.g., long-lived
radioactive sources arrayed as lines that scan across the patient, integrated
into the SPECT system). With CT, the measured Hounsﬁeld units must be
converted to attenuation coefﬁcients at the emission energy of the radiotracer
(e.g., 140 keV for Tc-99m). This conversion is typically a bi- or tri-linear
function. The big advantages of CT are speed, low noise, and—in the case of
combined SPECT/CT systems—perfect registration between the emission and
transmission images. With scanning line sources, there is usually less need for
any numerical conversion (because a radionuclide with approximately the same
energy photons as the emission radiotracer is chosen), but transmission images
from scanning lines sources are signiﬁcantly noisier than those from CT, and the
noise propagates into the attenuation-corrected emission images. (The spatial
resolution of transmission images from scanning line sources is poorer than that