3.8 Accuracy 89
are used for diagnosis (‘‘Is the disease present?’’), prognosis (‘‘How will the
disease progress, and what is the expected outcome?’’), treatment planning
(‘‘Which treatment will work best?’’), and treatment monitoring (‘‘Is the treat-
ment reversing the disease, and to what extent?’’). Fundamentally, we are
interested in the accuracy of medical images in the context of these clinical
applications. Here, ‘‘accuracy’’ means both conformity to truth (i.e., free-
dom from error) and clinical utility. In practice, we are usually interested in
quantitative accuracyand diagnostic accuracy.
3.8.1 Quantitative Accuracy
Sometimes, we are interested in the numerical value of a given anatomic or
functional feature within an image. For example, we may wish to measure
tumor dimensions from a radiograph, or estimate glucose metabolic rate from
a nuclear medicine image. In such situations, we need to know the error
in our measurement. This error, or difference from the true value, arises
from two sources: bias, which represents a systematic, reproducible difference
from the truth, and imprecision, which represents a random, measurement-to-
measurement variation.
It is helpful to separate the component of error due to bias from that
due to imprecision. If we can establish that the measurement is precise (i.e.,
reproducible), then we can correct for systematic errors through the use of
a calibration standard that converts the measured value to the true value. In
practice, error usually arises from both components, and our measurements are
never error-free.
3.8.2 Diagnostic Accuracy
We can conceptualize a medical image as representing some parameter (or set
of parameters) of interest in a patient. For the sake of simplicity, we assume
that the diagnostic process involves a test that extracts this parameter (or set of
parameters), which is then used to classify a given patient as either normal or
diseased. We further conceptualize two Gaussian distributions of the parameter
(or set of parameters), one for normal patients and another for diseased patients,
with (usually) some degree of overlap. This implies that some normal patients
may be classiﬁed as diseased and vice versa.
In a clinical setting, we are interested in two parameters:
• Sensitivity, also known as the true-positive fraction ; this is the frac-
tion of patients with disease who the test (e.g., the medical image) calls
abnormal.
• Speciﬁcity, also known as the true-negative fraction; this is the fraction
of patients without disease who the test (e.g., the medical image) calls
normal.
In practice, sensitivity and speciﬁcity are established in a group of patients
through the use of a 2 × 2 contingency table, as shown in Figure 3.17. Here,
a and b are, respectively, the number of diseased and normal patients who the