168 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Figure 5.22
An H&D curve.
10/H110021 100 101 102 103
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
(a) High-speed
film with
CaWO4
screens
(b) Direct x-ray
film
(c) High-speed
film without
screens
Fog level
Exposure, mR
Optical density
Toe
Linear
region
Shoulder
direct exposure (no screens) and D < 2, D is directly proportional to X. When
screens are used and D > 2, however, the relationship between X and D is
nonlinear, and it is given by the classic H&D curve (named after Hurter and
Drifﬁeld, who ﬁrst described this function), as shown in Figure 5.22. A typical
H&D curve is S-shaped, with a low exposure–low D toe, a linear portion, and
a high exposure–high D shoulder. Notice that D never goes to zero; there is
always a base fogoptical density, even in the absence of exposure.
In the linear region of an H&D curve, the response between the common
logarithm of exposure and optical density is approximately linear,
D = /Gamma1log10(X/X0) , (5.32)
where /Gamma1is the slope of the H&D curve in the linear region and X0 is the
exposure at which the linear region would hit the horizontal axis (D = 0) of the
H&D curve.
The quantity /Gamma1is called the ﬁlm gamma. It is unique to a particular ﬁlm and
a particular method of developing that ﬁlm (that is, it is a function of the devel-
oping chemicals, temperature, time of development, etc.), and it is typically in the
range of 0.5–3. Increasing the gamma of the ﬁlm increases contrast but reduces
the range of exposures over which the optical density response is linear. Correct
exposure of a ﬁlm occurs only in the linear range of its H&D curve. Thelatitude
of a ﬁlm is the range of exposures over which the H&D curve is linear. Thespeed
of a ﬁlm is the inverse of the exposure at which D = 1 + fog level. Consider the
radiographic ﬁlms shown in Figure 5.22. Clearly, the ﬁlm/screen combination
(a) is the fastest ﬁlm. The direct x-ray exposure ﬁlm (b) is next fastest and
has the largest gamma and lowest latitude. Finally, standard high-speed optical
ﬁlm (c) without screens is the slowest; it would require the largest x-ray expo-
sure of all three ﬁlms in order to achieve optical densities in the typical range
of 1–1.5.