290 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
Figure P8.7
(a) Detector without
collimator. (b) Detector
with collimator. See
Problem 8.17.
0.5 m 0.5 m
0.5 m 0.5 m
dh
l
0.8 m 0.8 m
y
y
x
x
(a)( b)
(f) If l gets larger, at some point radiation will only be able to hit the
detector through one hole. Find the smallest l = l0 when this happens.
What is Rc in this case?
(g) If the camera sensitivity is ϵ when l = 8 cm, what is its sensitivity
when l = l0? (For simplicity assume that the effective height of a
collimator hole is equal to l.)
Applications
8.18 Suppose you replaced the standard collimator on an Anger camera with
one that has only one hole with diameter d positioned at the center of the
camera—i.e., at x = 0 and y = 0. Let the object be a small radioactive
point source that is placed 20 cm away from the camera face in direct
alignment with the center of the camera.
(a) When a gamma ray photon goes through the collimator hole, the
camera produces a response. Explain in words what happens to this
photon and what sequence of events takes place in order to produce
the X and Y signals and the Z-pulse.
(b) Suppose the X signal is held constant until the next photon hits the
camera (so it is a piecewise constant signal X(t) in time.) Draw X(t)
when the hole has a small diameter [call this X1(t)] and then draw
X(t) when the hole has a larger diameter [call this X2(t)]. Account for
all effects that change when you increase the hole diameter and draw
the signals on the same vertical and horizontal scales with clear labels.
(c) Would you expect the sequence of Z-pulses to change when the hole
diameter (of this single hole) is increased? Explain your answer.
(d) If you double the hole diameter, what must you do to the hole length
in order for the camera to have the same sensitivity?
8.19 A planar scintigraphy calibration experiment is being performed using a
uniform ﬂood phantom. With this phantom, each pixel out of 64 × 64
pixels on an Anger camera is struck by four gamma photons per second
on average.
(a) If a total count of 2,000,000 across the whole camera is considered
to be a complete experiment, how long will it take (on average) to
complete the calibration scan?