Problems 327
for NaI(Tl). BGO does not convert gamma ray photons to light photons
as efﬁciently as NaI(Tl), and is in fact roughly 13% as efﬁcient.
In this problem, suppose two detectors are designed, one from NaI(Tl) and
one from BGO. Assume both are designed to stop 75% of the 511 keV
photons that strike the crystal.
(a) Find the detector thicknesses for NaI(Tl) and BGO.
(b) A light burst from NaI(Tl) has a higher intrinsic SNR than that from
BGO. Find the ratio of intrinsic SNRs, NaI(Tl) to BGO.
9.8 You decide to build a PET scanner from a dual-head SPECT camera you
own. It has two 30-cm square Anger cameras mounted facing each other
1.5 m apart.
(a) Would you use the low-energy collimators, the high-energy collima-
tors, or no collimators? Explain.
(b) What signiﬁcant piece of electronics would you have to add to the
SPECT circuitry to make this work as a PET scanner?
(c) Explain how you would use the X and Y signals coming out of the
opposing Anger cameras. Would you use the Z-pulses? Why or why
not?
(d) You will have to rotate the Anger cameras at some point during the
scan. What is the minimum number of angular positions of the two
cameras that would be required in order to get full angular coverage
for PET reconstruction?
(e) Consider the radiotracer concentration in the body. Would you expect
to require a higher, lower, or about the same dose in this make-shift
PET scanner versus a real PET scanner? Explain your rationale.
9.9 Consider the two-dimensional cross section shown in Figure P9.6 consist-
ing of three separate compartments R
1, R2, and R3.
Figure P9.6
Object geometry for
Problem 9.9.
y
x
R3R1 R2
3 cm 1 cm 2 cm
6 cm
(a) Suppose a solution containing a 511 keV gamma ray emitting radionu-
clide with concentration 0.3 mCi/cm3 ﬁlls only R2; R1 and R3 contain
nonradioactive solutions. Let the linear attenuation coefﬁcients (at
511 keV) in the three regions be μ1 = 0.2c m−1, μ2 = 0.3c m−1, and
μ3 = 0.1c m−1, respectively. Suppose we image the radioactivity using