5.2 Instrumentation 147
place entirely within 1 × 10−8 second of the excitation, and phosphorescence,
in which light emission can be delayed and extended over a longer period of
time. For screens, it is desirable to use a luminescent material that is much
more ﬂuorescent than phosphorescent. This way, there is little chance of an
afterglow that might spoil the exposure by either motion after exposure or by
light from a previous exposure.
Among the many luminescent materials, good intensifying screen phosphors
should also be highly x-ray attenuating and should emit many light photons for
every x-ray photon that is stopped. Thus, the best phosphors have high atomic
numbers (so the linear attenuation coefﬁcient is large) and high conversion
efﬁciencies. Theconversion efﬁciencyis a measure of the number of light photons
emitted per incident x-ray photon. Typical conversion efﬁciencies are between
5 and 20 percent depending on the type of phosphor used and its thickness.
A typical conversion efﬁciency for modern screens yields 1 × 10
3 light
photons per incident 50 keV x-ray photon. This number depends on the energy
of the incident x-ray photon as well since the conversion of a higher energy x-ray
photon will produce more light. Total light output depends on the combination
of attenuation of the material at a given x-ray energy and the conversion
efﬁciency at that energy. The speed of a screen is really just a measure of its
conversion efﬁciency. If the conversion efﬁciency is higher, then the screen is
‘‘faster,’’ because the larger numbers of light photons emitted by the phosphor
will expose the ﬁlm faster.
Thomas Edison explored many phosphors in the early 1900s for their
possible use in radiography. He discovered that calcium tungstate (CaWO
4)i s
an excellent ﬂuorescent phosphor for radiological applications. Until relatively
recently, nearly all intensifying screens were made from calcium tungstate. In
the late 1970s, rare earth phosphors were introduced and are more commonly
used today because they have higher conversion efﬁciencies.
Radiographic Film After Roentgen discovered x-rays by observation of a
mysteriously glowing phosphor, he quickly learned that x-rays could also
expose a photographic emulsion. Although digital detectors (see Section 5.2.7)
are undergoing rapid development and widespread adoption, ﬁlm is still very
commonly used in radiography both as an x-ray receptor and as an archival
storage mechanism for radiographic images (even for those acquired digitally).
Because of the nearly exclusive use of scintillation screens, radiographic ﬁlm
is really just optical ﬁlm, designed to capture the optical image created within
the screens that sandwich the ﬁlm. Common sizes in the United States include
14 × 17, 14 × 14, 11 × 14, 10 × 12, 8 × 10, and 7 × 17 inches.
Many different ﬁlm speeds are available, depending on the application. The
detailed optical properties of ﬁlm greatly inﬂuence the resultant quality of the
developed image. Also, the precise details of chemical development play a large
role in the ﬁnal appearance of the ﬁlm as well. We will only consider these issues
from the highest level, in enough detail so that we can understand the broad
issues relating x-ray exposure to ﬁlm appearance (see Section 5.3.4).
Radiographic Cassette A radiographic cassette is really just a holder for two
intensifying screens and the ﬁlm ‘‘sandwiched’’ between. One side of the cassette
is radiolucent, while the other usually includes a sheet of lead foil. Therefore,
the cassette can be loaded only one way into the x-ray machine. At least one side