114 Chapter 4 Physics of Radiography
medical images (column 1) and ending with those important in understanding
the biological effects of radiation (column 2). Concepts that are relevant only in
nuclear medicine are listed in italics and will be discussed in Chapter 7.
4.4.1 Primary Energetic Electron Interactions
The only particles of direct consequence to the formation of medical images are
electrons and positrons.1 Since positrons are used solely in nuclear medicine, we
postpone discussion of the interaction of positrons with matter until Chapter 7.
Here we consider only the interaction of energetic electronswith matter.
Energetic electrons interact and transfer energy to an absorbing medium by
two modes: collisional transferand radiative transfer. In collisional transfer, by
far the most common type of interaction at the electron energies used in medical
imaging, a (typically small) fraction of the electron’s kinetic energy is transferred
to another electron in the target medium with which it collides. As the affected
atom returns to its original state, infrared radiation is generated, producing
heat in the target medium. As shown in Figure 4.4(a), the incident electron’s
path may be redirected as a result of the collision, and many more interactions,
both collisional and radiative, may subsequently take place, until the incident
electron’s kinetic energy is exhausted. Occasionally, a large amount of energy
may be transferred to a struck electron, creating a new energetic electron, which
forms a new path of ionization, called a delta ray, and a new set of collisional
and radiative energy transfers.
In radiative transfer, the energetic electron’s interaction with an atom
produces x-rays. This can happen in two ways: characteristic radiation or
bremsstrahlung radiation. In the generation of characteristic radiation, as shown
in Figure 4.4(b), the incident electron collides with a K-shell electron, exciting
Figure 4.4
Energetic electrons can
(a) collide with other
electrons until they lose
their energy; (b) eject a
K-shell electron,
generating a characteristic
x-ray; or (c) be ‘‘braked’’
by a nucleus, generating
bremsstrahlung radiation.
Delta ray
Atoms
Ejected electron
Characteristic x-ray
Nucleus
Bremsstrahlung x-ray
(a)
(b)
(c)
1Other particles, most notably alpha particles, are relevant in the production of radiotracers for use
in nuclear medicine (see Chapter 7).