7.6 Radiotracers 249
7.6 Radiotracers
There are about 1,500 known radionuclides, of which 200 or so can be
purchased. Out of these, however, only a dozen or so are suitable for nuclear
medicine for several reasons. First, we desire ‘‘clean’’ gamma ray emitters—that
is, ones that do not also emit alpha and beta particles (because these particles
would only contribute to patient radiation dose without usefully contributing
to image formation, as they would never make it out of the patient’s body).
Positron emitters are also suitable because the positrons rapidly annihilate with
electrons to produce gamma rays. Second, unlike projection radiography and
CT, where we require attenuation of the radiation to produce image contrast,
in nuclear medicine we would prefer that there would be no attenuation of the
radiation. This is because in nuclear medicine we are trying to determine the
location of the emitters; attenuation simultaneously adds to the patient dose and
reduces the signal we can detect. This requirement suggests that the energy of the
gamma rays should be high so that they leave the body with little attenuation.
On the other hand, we must be able to actually detect the radiation once it leaves
the body, and the higher the energy the less likely the gamma rays will interact
in the detector. For these reasons (and others, as we will see later), the gamma
emitters used in nuclear medicine have energies in the range 70–511 keV.
Another important property of a radiotracer is its half-life. In general, the
half-life of a radiotracer depends on both the physical half-life of the radionuclide
and the biological half-life of the pharmaceutical; this biological half-life arises
from body processes that metabolize or clear the pharmaceutical. The effective
half-life T
e combines the physical Tp and biological Tb half-lives:
1
Te
= 1
Tp
+ 1
Tb
. (7.14)
In general, we need to be able to form images in a matter of minutes, not
seconds or hours. If the radionuclide decays in seconds, there is hardly enough
time to administer and metabolize the compound before the source is lost. On
the other hand, if it takes hours to create an image, patient motion will be a
serious problem and natural metabolic processes will change the distribution
of the radiotracer in the body over the period of the exam. Furthermore, a
long half-life increases the radiation dose to the patient. Therefore, the ideal
effective half-life of the radionuclide is short but not too short. Typical times are
on the order of minutes to several hours. Because of this relatively short time
requirement, some radiotracers are made on-site in generators or cyclotrons,
while others are ordered from a nearby radiopharmacy. A list of the more
commonly used radionuclides and some of their properties is given in Table 7.1.
An important characteristic of a radionuclide is that it must be useful and
safe to ‘‘trace’’ within the body, either by itself or attached to a compound. Some
of the radionuclides in Table 7.1 are more useful than others in this respect.
Iodine, for example is a naturally occurring substance in the body, accumulating
in the thyroid gland. Iodine-123 or I-131 in a sodium salt can be administered
orally and measured in the thyroid to assess thyroid function. Technetium-99m
can be used to label diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid (DTPA), which is
ﬁltered by the kidneys, and serial images of the kidneys can be used to assess