5.2 Instrumentation 153
detection has the potential for higher spatial resolution and are being rapidly
improved in materials that will offer lower noise designs.
CMOS-Based Digital Radiography Systems Complementary metal oxide semi-
conductor (CMOS) active-pixel sensor (APS) imagers are the most common
optical sensor for consumer cameras. Their use in x-ray detection is relatively
new and the advantages and disadvantages are still being discovered even as
the technology continues to improve. Current technology allows for pixels in
CMOS sensors to be made larger than CCD elements, they have low cost and
low power consumption, they are tolerant to x-ray irradiation, and they have
fast pixel readout capability.
Each pixel in a CMOS APS comprises a photodiode and three or more
MOSFET transistors. Because light is used as an input, these detectors are
indirect and must be coupled to a scintillator as in a-Si TFT detectors. Like
TFTs, the pixels within a CMOS APS are accessed by activating an access
enable conductor, which identiﬁes the row and then reads a particular output
conductor, which identiﬁes the column. As opposed to the CMOS passive-pixel
sensor (an earlier design that has only has one transister per pixel), the CMOS
APS uses extra transistors to amplify the signal (accumulated charge) prior to
readout, yielding much lower noise and faster readouts.
The pixel size in CMOS sensors can be much larger than that of CCD
detectors, which is an advantage. A typical pixel size is 0.075 mm× 0.075 mm,
and they can be grouped together to make larger ‘‘superpixels’’—for example,
up to 4 × 4 to make pixels of size 0.3 mm × 0.3 mm—which enables faster
readout rates for real-time applications. Like CCD imaging arrays, CMOS
imaging arrays must be manufactured on a single semiconductor substrate and
this is a limiting factor in comparison to TFT-based detectors. Second generation
sizes support up to 5 cm × 10 cm substrates and these can be tiled (with greater
ease than tiling CCD arrays) to make up larger panels, currently up to 290 mm×
230 mm, which is suitable for mammography applications.
Wireless and Rechargable DR Detectors In addition to its capability for high
resolution, convenience of workﬂow is a key reason that CR got an early
headstart in the digital x-ray area. In particular, existing x-ray systems could
be retroﬁtted to support the CR cartridge instead of ﬁlm screen cartridges,
and only a separate processing unit needed to be purchased to replace the
chemical ﬁlm developers. Early DR systems were sold to replace existing x-ray
systems—not just their detectors—and therefore represented a considerable
capital investment.
Newer DR detectors are completely portable plates or cartridges that have
their own rechargable battery power sources and wireless ethernet connectivity.
They are completely encased in plastic so that they can be easily cleaned and will
survive minor bumps in the course of normal use. These detectors can be shared
between multiple rooms or x-ray systems and can be retroﬁt into existing table
and wall-mounted systems. Data from these detectors can be transmitted directly
to a viewing station or departmental picture archiving and communication
system. Because of these conveniences, the improving resolution and SNR, and
the lack of a requirement for separate reading and erasing hardware, DR systems
are beginning to overtake CR in modern radiology departments.