4.4 Nature and Properties of Ionizing Radiation 113
Although it is suggested by Table 4.2, x-rays and gamma rays are not dis-
tinguished by their frequency or photon energies. Instead, they are distinguished
by their point of origin. In particular, x-rays are created in the electron cloud
of atoms while gamma rays are created in the nuclei of atoms, which in turn
are undergoing reorganization due to radioactive decay. Thus, gamma rays are
associated with radioactivity and x-rays are not. Although gamma rays tend to
have higher frequencies (energies) than x-rays, there is a large overlap in the
frequencies (energies) of x-rays and gamma rays used in medical imaging. Fur-
thermore, once produced, x-rays and gamma rays behave the same in terms of
their propagation properties and interaction with matter. Therefore, our under-
standing of the propagation and detection of EM waves in the x-ray–gamma
ray photon energy range is essential background material for all the medical
imaging modalities using ionizing radiation.
It turns out that both the production and detection of EM radiation over
a large range of frequencies play major roles in medical imaging. Visible
light is used in radiography to improve the efﬁciency of x-ray detection. The
attenuation of x-rays is the primary mechanism used to create images in
projection radiography and computed tomography. Finally, gamma rays are
detected in order to locate radiotracers in nuclear medicine.
4.4 Nature and Properties of Ionizing
Radiation
Particulate and EM ionizing radiations interact with the materials through
which they are traveling, imparting energy to the material, losing energy from
and redirecting their own radiation, and generating new types of particles and
radiation. Generally speaking, the effects that we care about fall into two broad
categories: (1) those that are used in imaging or that affect the imaging process
and (2) those that are not used in imaging but contribute to dose—that is, have
biological consequences. Speciﬁc concepts related to these two broad categories
tend to apply separately to particulate radiation or EM radiation. Table 4.3
lists speciﬁc concepts related to ionizing radiation, positioned according to the
categories for which they largely apply. We will now begin to discuss each
of these concepts, starting with those important in forming and analyzing
TABLE 4.3
Radiation Concepts
Imaging Dose
Particulate Bremsstrahlung Linear energy transfer
Characteristic radiation Speciﬁc ionization
Positron annihilation∗
Positron range
EM Attenuation Air kerma
Photoelectric effect Dose
Compton scatter Dose equivalent
Characteristic radiation Effective dose
Polyenergetic f-factor
∗Italicized entries are discussed in Chapter 7.