5.2 Instrumentation 141
Figure 5.6
Different beam restrictors.
Diaphragm
beam restrictor
Cone beam
restrictor
Collimator
beam restrictors
(a) (b) (c)
window, as shown in Figure 5.6(a). They are simple and inexpensive but result
in a ﬁxed geometry that can usually be used only in dedicated systems that have
only one purpose (such as chest radiography). Cones or cylinders, as shown
in Figure 5.6(b), are ﬁxed in their geometry but can have somewhat better
performance. Collimators are more expensive but are so much more ﬂexible
and better performing that they are used nearly all the time in projection x-
ray systems. As shown in Figure 5.6(c), collimators have variable diaphragms
comprising movable pieces of lead. Most often, there are two collimators, one
near the tube and one farther away from the tube. Typically, there is a scored
mirror in between these two collimators so that a light coming from the side
will shine through the second collimator, illuminating the ﬁeld of view with an
alignment grid.
5.2.3 Compensation Filters and Contrast Agents
Attenuation is the process by which x-rays are absorbed or redirected (scattered)
within the body or other objects in the ﬁeld of view. Body tissues attenuate x-rays
in different amounts depending on their linear attenuation coefﬁcients and the
x-ray energies. It is this differential attenuation that gives rise to contrast—and
therefore the ability to differentiate tissues—in an x-ray image. In certain
circumstances, we may want to artiﬁcially change the natural attenuation of the
body prior to detecting the x-rays. We now discuss compensation ﬁlters and
contrast agents, both used for this purpose.
Compensation Filters Thick body parts or dense materials (such as metal
or bone) stop more x-rays than thinner body parts and normal soft tissues.
For example, the torso attenuates more x-rays in the middle than at its edges,
simply because it is thicker in the middle. Imaging both locations—that is, a
location having large numbers of transmitted photons and a location having
low numbers of photons—within the same exposure is difﬁcult because of the
limited dynamic range of x-ray detectors. One region would be overexposed
while the other is underexposed and neither would yield a usable diagnostic
image.
In these cases, acompensation ﬁlter, comprising a specially shaped aluminum
or a leaded plastic object, can be placed between the x-ray source and the
patient or in some cases between the patient and the detector. Several types
of compensation ﬁlters are shown in Figure 5.7. Notice that the compensation