6.2 CT Instrumentation 195
introduced in CT for a variety of clinical applications. In the past, dual-energy
CT data would be acquired by either scanning the subject twice using different
kVp’s—for example, 80 kVp and 140 kVp—or by using a pulsed mode that
excites the tube at alternating kVp’s during a single scan. Despite the clinical
utility, these approaches were not very popular due to the increased scan time
and other technical challenges.
With the recent introduction of dual source CT (i.e., scanners with two
x-ray tubes), the situation has changed, and many scanners that are capable of
both rapid scanning at a single-energy and simultaneous dual-energy acquisition
are being introduced into routine clinical use. Since two separate images are
acquired, clinicians are able to study the images separately as in a dual-modality
study like PET/CT or combine them into single image or collection of images that
reveal different underlying tissue properties based on their linear attenuation
coefﬁcients at the two effective energies.
6.2.4 CT Detectors
Most modern scanners usesolid-state detectors, as shown in Figure 6.6(a). These
detectors contain a scintillation crystal in the ﬁrst stage, typically a cadmium
tungstate, sodium iodide, bismuth germanate, yttrium-based, or cesium iodide
crystal. X-rays interact with the crystal mainly by photoelectric effect, producing
photoelectrons, similar to what happens to the phosphor in an intensifying
screen. These electrons are excited and emit visible light when they spontaneously
de-excite.
This scintillation process results in a burst of light. The light is then converted
to electric current using a solid-state photodiode that is attached tightly to the
scintillator. (Some 4G and 5G scanners use photomultiplier tubes to convert
light to electricity; see Section 8.2.3 for a description of such tubes.) For 1G,
2G, and 3G systems, which use line collimators in front of the detectors, the
efﬁciency of each detector may be increased by using thick crystals. However,
thinner crystals must be used in 4G systems to allow the detectors to detect off-
axis incident photons (as is required by the scanner geometry); unfortunately,
thinner crystals have lower efﬁciency.
In 3G scanners, very small and highly directional detectors are required.
Either solid-state detectors, as described above, or xenon gas detectors, as
shown in Figure 6.6(b), can be designed to satisfy these requirements. Xenon
gas detectors use compressed xenon gas in long, thin tubes, which when ionized
generate a current between an anode and cathode (maintained at a high potential
difference). These detectors are typically less efﬁcient than solid-state detectors,
Figure 6.6
(a) Solid-state detectors,
(b) xenon gas detectors,
and (c) multiple
(solid-state) detector
array.
......
Scintillator
crystals Photodiodes
X-rays
(a)
Scintillator
crystals Photodiodes
X-rays
(c)(b)
X-rays
Anode
Cathode
Xenon
gas