3.5 Signal-to-Noise Ratio 79
where [see also (3.9)]
SNRp(u, v) = |H(u, v)|2|F(u, v)|2
NPS(u, v) = MTF2(u, v)
NPS(u, v) |F(u, v)|2H2(0, 0) (3.67)
is called the frequency-dependent power SNR. The frequency-dependent power
SNR quantiﬁes, at a given frequency, the relative ‘‘strength’’ of signal to that
of noise at the output of the LSI system under consideration. From (3.66) and
(3.67), SNR
p(u, v) provides a relationship between contrast, resolution, noise,
and image quality. For a given output noise level (i.e., a ﬁxed NPS) and a given
input f (x, y), better contrast and resolution properties (i.e., a larger MTF) result
in better image quality (i.e., a higher output power SNR).
3.5.3 Differential SNR
Consider an object (or target) of interest placed on a background. Let ft
and fb be the average image intensities within the target and background,
respectively. A useful choice for SNR is obtained by taking the ‘‘signal’’ to
be the difference in average image intensity values between the target and the
background integrated over the area A of the target, and by taking the ‘‘noise’’
to be the random ﬂuctuation of image intensity from its mean over an area A
of the background. This leads to the differential signal-to-noise ratio(SNR
diff),
given by
SNRdiff = A(ft − fb)
σb(A) , (3.68)
where σb(A) is the standard deviation of image intensity values from their mean
over an area A of the background. From (3.12), we have
SNRdiff = CAfb
σb(A) , (3.69)
which relates the differential SNR to contrast.
EXAMPLE 3.12
Consider the case of projection radiography. We may take fb to be the average photon
count per unit area in the background region around a target, in which case, fb = λb,
where λb is the mean of the underlying Poisson distribution governing the number of
background photons counted per unit area. Notice that, in this case, σb(A) =
√
λbA.
Question What is the average number of background photons counted per unit area,
if we want to achieve a desirable differential SNR?
Answer From (3.69),
SNRdiff = CAλb√
Aλb
= C
√
Aλb . (3.70)
From (3.70), the differential SNR is approximately proportional to contrast as well as
to the square root of the object area multiplied by radiation exposure (characterized by