CHAPTER
33
Image Quality
3.1 Introduction
The primary purpose of a medical imaging system is to create images of the
internal structures and functions of the human body that can be used by medical
professionals to diagnose abnormal conditions, determine the underlying mech-
anisms that produce and control these conditions, guide therapeutic procedures,
and monitor the effectiveness of treatment. The ability of medical professionals
to successfully accomplish these tasks strongly depends on the quality of the
images acquired by the medical imaging system at hand, where by ‘‘quality’’ we
mean the degree to which an image allows medical professionals to accomplish
their goals.
Image quality depends on the particular imaging modality used. With each
modality, the range of image quality may be considerable, depending on the
characteristics and setup of the particular medical imaging system, the skill
of the operator handling the system, and several other factors, such as patient
characteristics and imaging time. Studying how these factors affect image quality
is an important and complicated task. This task is simpliﬁed by focusing on
the following six important factors: (1) contrast, (2) resolution, (3) noise,
(4) artifacts, (5) distortion, and (6) accuracy.
The ability of medical professionals to discriminate among anatomical or
functional features in a given image strongly depends on contrast. Contrast
quantiﬁes the difference between image characteristics (e.g., intensities in shades
of gray or color) of an object (or feature within an object) and surrounding
objects or background. High contrast allows easier identiﬁcation of individual
objects in an image, whereas low contrast makes this task difﬁcult. In the
overview to Part I, we presented images from different modalities that have
different contrast. For example, the brain structures in the positron emission
tomography (PET) image in Figure I.4(c) are of higher contrast than the same
structures in Figure I.4(a) or (b), because the actual signal coming from the
patient is of intrinsically higher contrast in PET.
54