160 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
(computer-based) image analysis methods, in general, which requires such
methods to be more complicated than would otherwise be the case.
Depth-Dependent Magniﬁcation Another consequence of divergent x-rays is
object magniﬁcation, which is speciﬁcally called depth-dependent magniﬁcation
in radiography. Consider the ‘‘stick’’ object of height w shown in Figure 5.16.
It is clear from the geometry that the object will always appear larger on the
detector than it is in reality. Furthermore, the height of the object on the detector
is different depending on the position of the object in the ﬁeld-of-view.
Using the concept of similar triangles, it is easy to show that when the object
is at position z, its height wz on the detector will be
wz = w d
z . (5.13)
From this, we see that the magniﬁcation M(z) is given by
M(z) = d
z . (5.14)
The magniﬁcation is a function of z, which is why this magniﬁcation is referred
to as depth-dependent.
There are three important consequences of depth-dependent magniﬁcation.
First, two objects within the body of the same size may appear to have different
sizes on the radiograph. Thus, judgments about relative sizes of anatomical
features must be made with caution and knowledge. Second, anatomical features
studied longitudinally—that is, using radiographs of the same patient taken over
several months or years—can only be compared in size if the same radiographic
conditions and patient positioning is used. A change in the patient’s weight, for
example, may position a physiological landmark differently relative to the x-ray
source causing an apparent change in size which could be falsely associated
with the progression of disease. Third, the boundaries of a single object can
be blurred simply because the ‘‘front’’ of the object is closer to the radiograph
than its ‘‘back.’’ This effect, which might be called depth-dependent blurring,i s
studied in the following example.
Figure 5.16
Depth-dependent
magniﬁcation of a ‘‘stick’’
object.
X-ray
origin
Detector
plane
d
z1 z2
w
w
w1
w2