9.1 Instrumentation 303
Combined PET/CT Systems As noted above, in discussing nuclear medicine
we always emphasize the ‘‘functional’’ nature of the image data. There is now
ample evidence that clinical interpretation of nuclear medicine studies, especially
in PET, can beneﬁt from reference to anatomic images from CT or MRI. In
the past, a physician would review the PET images on a computer display and
the CT ﬁlms on a light box and then perform mental ‘‘image fusion.’’ This
prompted the development of software for postacquisition image registration
and fusion. This process requires the images from both procedures to be on a
common computer (typically via transfer of the CT exam to a nuclear medicine
computer workstation); the PET images are interpolated to a common voxel
size and registered with the CT exam, and the fused or overlaid images are
displayed.
At least in theory, the best way of registering PET and CT is if both
studies are acquired via a combined system with a common gantry and patient
table. Accordingly, virtually all PET equipment manufacturers have developed
combined PET/CT systems, and these represent the vast majority of PET systems
sold today.
In a combined PET/CT system, both PET and CT exams may be performed
without moving the patient relative to the table between the two exams. This
provides functional and anatomical images that can be registered and fused
with a higher degree of positional accuracy than is permitted by imaging on
two separate scanners, especially because of differences in body shape and
position introduced by the use of two different tables. The improved registration
accuracy with a combined PET/CT system thus mainly results from the patient
being in the same position on one table. However, physiologic motion such as
breathing and abdominal motion cannot be avoided. These motions decrease
the registration accuracy and may produce artifacts in attenuation-corrected
PET images using the CT map (see below). Notice that the CT exam is typically
taken during a breath-hold, but the PET exam requires breathing. In addition
to improved positional accuracy, there is easier availability of both the PET and
CT data for the fusion software with a combined PET/CT system since they are
combined within one system.
As with combined SPECT/CT systems, in addition to their use for anatomic
localization, the CT images may be used as attenuation maps for performing
attenuation correction on the PET images. As noted above, one of the theoretical
advantages of PET over SPECT is that measured tissue attenuation values can
be used to exactly correct for the effects of attenuation in the emission data,
as discussed below in Section 9.2.2. In this regard, the attraction of using CT
is that it provides high resolution, high contrast, and low noise attenuation
maps obtained quickly using a fast helical scan. As with SPECT, note that using
x-ray CT images for attenuation correction requires converting attenuation
values measured with a low-energy, polychromatic x-ray beam into 511 keV,
monoenergetic attenuation values.
Combined PET/MRI Systems As we will subsequently discuss in forthcoming
chapters, MRI offers certain advantages over CT. Accordingly, it is not surprising
that manufacturers have been developing combined PET/MRI systems, and these
are now becoming commercially available. However, combining PET and MRI is
technically challenging. The high static magnetic ﬁeld, quickly changing gradient