Problems 133
Attenuation of EM Radiation
4.8 (a) Calculate the thickness of shielding material needed to block out
99.5% of incident radiation for a material with linear attenuation
coefﬁcient μ.
(b) Range is deﬁned as the reciprocal of μ, the linear attenuation coefﬁ-
cient. It represents the distance at which the intensity of a beam has
been reduced to 1/e of its original value. What approximate order of
magnitude would you want the range of an ionizing beam in tissue to
be? Microns? Millimeters? Centimeters? Meters? Kilometers? Why?
4.9 Prove Equation (4.24).
4.10 A bar phantom of thickness 0.4 cm is uniformly irradiated by monoener-
getic x-ray photons, and a screen is placed behind the phantom to detect
the x-ray photons. The bars of the phantom are made from a material that
has an HVL of 0.1 cm. In the space between the bars, x-ray photons pass
without attenuation. Assuming the intensity of the image is proportional
to the x-ray photons that hit the screen in a unit area, what is the contrast
of the resulting image?
4.11 Compton scattering of photons causes image blurring since the secondary
x-ray photon diverges from the primary beam. You are designing an x-ray
detector system and wish to eliminate all photons that have scattered more
than 25 degrees in an attempt to improve the resulting image quality. You
are using a mono-energetic x-ray source that emits photons with wave-
length 8.9 × 10
−2 angstroms. Your detector is capable of discriminating
the energy of the incoming photon by examining the pulse height. What
range of photon energies will your system accept?
4.12 Suppose photons with energy hν = 100 keV are incident upon some mate-
rial and some are scattered.
(a) A detector decides that a photon has not been scattered if its energy
satisﬁes hν
′ > 99 keV. What is the maximum scattering angle such that
a photon is still treated as traveling along a straight path?
(b) You are designing a detector system to eliminate all photons that have
been scattered more than 25◦. What range of photon energies will your
system accept?
4.13 Sodium iodide (NaI) crystals can be used to detect x-rays. Suppose the
linear attenuation coefﬁcient of an NaI crystal is 2.31 cm−1 at 140 keV.
(a) What is the HVL of this NaI crystal at 140 keV?
(b) Suppose an x-ray photon with energy E = 140 keV hits the NaI
crystal and scatters by 90◦. What is the energyE′ of the scattered x-ray
photon?
(c) Is the scattered photon more or less likely to be absorbed than the
incident photon? Explain. (Note that iodine has a single K-edge at
33 keV.)
4.14 To block out 90% of the incident radiation, a 1.5 cm thickness of a
particular shielding material is needed.
(a) What is the HVL of this material?