208 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
Figure 6.16
Summation step.
(a) Partial summation
images using just 40, 80,
and 120 (out of 240 total)
projections. (b) The
ﬁltered projections that
are used in the partial
summation images shown
in (a). (c) The image that
is reconstructed using all
240 ﬁltered projections.
40/240 80/240 120/240
Partial summations
Final reconstructionFiltered sinogram
240/240
240
120
80
40
(a)
(b) (c)
6.3.4 Fan-Beam Reconstruction
As discussed in Section 6.2, all modern commercial scanners have a fan-beam
source-to-detector arrangement. Therefore, in practice it is necessary to recon-
struct images from fan-beam projections rather than parallel-ray projections. In
this section, we develop a CBP reconstruction algorithm that can be applied to
a fan-beam geometry.
Geometry There are three basic fan-beam geometries to consider: (1) those
that have equal angles between the measured ray-paths, (2) those that have
equal detector spacing, and (3) those that have equal angles and equal detector
spacing. The third geometry can only be satisﬁed if the detectors are placed
along a circular arc whose center is at the source. In this section, we consider the
equal-angle case with detectors positioned on a circular arc. A reconstruction
formula for the case of equal detectors on a straight line can be developed using
analogous means.
We consider the fan-beam geometry shown in Figure 6.17. This is a 3G
geometry in which the source and detector rotate together around the laboratory
origin, also called the rotational isocenter. A fan-beam projection, measured at
each rotational position of the source, is denoted p(γ, β) [in analogy to g(ℓ, θ)],
where γ is the angular position of a given detector and β is the angular position
of the source, as shown in Figure 6.17. Notice that both γ and β are angles
measured in the counterclockwise direction; however, their origins are different
and so are their reference directions (physical orientations when taking on zero
values). In particular, β measures the source position around the isocenter, and
it is zero when the source is resting on the +y-axis. On the other hand, γ is