2.8 Summary and Key Concepts 47
The scaling theorem for the Hankel transform, (2.120), is then used to yield
f(r) = H−1
{
rect
( q
2ϱ 0
)}
= 4ϱ 2
0 jinc(2ϱ 0r) .
2.8 Summary and Key Concepts
In this book, we take a signals and systems approach to the understanding and
analysis of medical imaging systems. Signals model physical processes; systems
model how medical imaging systems create new signals (images, in our case)
from these original signals. In this chapter, we presented the following key
concepts that you should now understand:
1. Signals are mathematical functions, and they can be continuous, discrete, or
mixed.
2. The point impulse or impulse function is used as the input signal to
characterize the response of a system, which is the impulse response.
3. Comb and sampling functions, rect and sinc functions, and exponential
and sinusoidal signals are used to help describe and characterize imaging
systems.
4. A system is linear if, when the input consists of a collection of signals, the
output is a summation of the responses of the system to each individual
input signal.
5. A system is shift-invariant if an arbitrary translation of the input signal
results in an identical translation of the output.
6. A signal is separable if it can be represented as the product of 1-D signals.
7. The Fourier transform represents signals as a sum of sinusoids of different
frequencies, with associated magnitude and phase.
8. The Fourier space analog of the impulse response is the transfer function.
9. The output of a linear, shift-invariant system is the convolution of the input
with the impulse response; in Fourier space, it is the product of the Fourier
transform of the input and the transfer function.
10. Functions that are circularly symmetric have Fourier transforms that are
also circularly symmetric.
11. The Hankel transformis a one-dimensional transform that yields the Fourier
transform of circularly symmetric functions.
Further Reading
Gonzalez, R.C. and Woods, R.E.Digital Image Pro-
cessing, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 2007.
Macovski, A. Medical Imaging Systems. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983.
Oppenheim, A.V., Willsky, A.S., and Nawad, S.H.
Signals and Systems , 2nd ed. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996.