98 Chapter 3 Image Quality
where x and y are the coordinates in the image plane and ξ and η are
coordinates in the physical domain.
(a) If we take measurements on rectangular grids in the image plane, ﬁnd
a way to correct the geometric distortion.
(b) If we want to take measurements on rectangular grids in the physical
domain, on what points should we take measurements in the image
domain?
3.26 Suppose the pdfs of the test result for patients with and without a disease
are modeled as Gaussian with different mean values and variances, as
shown in Figure 3.18. We design a diagnostic test by selecting a threshold
t
0. For a patient whose test value is below t0, we call it normal. If the test
value is above t0, we call is diseased. By selecting different thresholds, we
obtain different diagnostic tests. Denote the means and variances of the
test result of the normal and diseased subjects as μ0, σ2
0 , and μ1, σ2
1 .A n d
assume μ0 <μ 1.
(a) Find expressions for the pdfs of the test value for normal and diseased
subjects.
(b) If we choose t0 = (μ0 + μ1)/2, compute the sensitivity and the speci-
ﬁcity.
(c) Derive an expression for the sensitivity as a function of the threshold
value.
(d) Derive an expression for the diagnostic accuracy as a function of the
threshold value.
Applications, Extensions and Advanced Topics
3.27 Show that a medical imaging system composed of several subsystems
will be inferior to each individual subsystem in terms of contrast and
resolution.
3.28 In most modern medical imaging systems, images are measured at discrete
grid points. Interpolation is needed when we want to treat the images
as functions deﬁned on a continuous domain. For 1-D signals, linear
interpolation is one of the simplest. It can easily be extended to bilinear
interpolation in 2-D and trilinear interpolation in 3-D. Linear interpolation
is deﬁned as
f (x) = x
1 − x
x1 − x0
f (x0) + x − x0
x1 − x0
f (x1), x0 ≤ x ≤ x1 .
In 2-D, bilinear interpolation for f (p)f r o mf (A), f (B), f (C), and f (D)i s
done in the following steps (see Figure P3.3):
• Using linear interpolation to get f (E)f r o mf (A) and f (B).
• Using linear interpolation to get f (F) from f (C) and f (D).
• Using linear interpolation to get f (P)f r o mf (E) and f (F).
(a) Derive an explicit expression for f (P)u s i n gf (A), f (B), f (C), and f (D).
(b) Prove that the results are the same whether we get f (P) from f (E) and
f (F), or from f (G) and f (H).