148 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
of the interior of the cassette contains a spongy, foam material that applies a
uniform pressure against the screen so that a uniform contact is created between
the ﬁlm and all parts of each of the screens. Optical mirrors are located outside
the screens, pointed inward so that nearly all the light produced in the screens
ends up exposing the ﬁlm. Some systems, particularly those with high resolution
such as mammography systems, contain only one screen, but the principle of
holding the ﬁlm tightly against the single screen within the cassette still applies.
Film must be loaded in a darkroom in order to avoid premature exposure.
The cassette is opened like a suitcase or briefcase only as much as is required
to slip in the radiographic ﬁlm. This minimizes the amount of dust and other
contaminants that might end up inside the cassette. When the cassette is closed,
pressure is applied so that the foam inside compresses, creating a uniform
contact between the screens and the ﬁlm. Cassettes and screens must be cleaned
regularly in order to avoid contaminants that might appear in the images.
5.2.6 X-Ray Image Intensiﬁers
X-ray image intensiﬁers(XRIIs) are used in ﬂuoroscopy, where low-dose, real-
time projection radiography is required, whereas a conventional x-ray system
might use a ﬁlament current of 50–1,200 mA, a ﬂuoroscopy unit would typically
use only 0.5–5.0 mA so that the x-ray tube can operate continuously. The light
levels produced by these low-intensity x-rays striking a conventional phosphor
are too low for human vision in room lighting, so the XRII was developed to
amplify the light. A diagram depicting an XRII is given in Figure 5.11.
X-rays pass through an input windowmade of aluminum or titanium, with
a thickness ranging between 0.25 and 0.5 mm. This type of material creates
minimal loss of x-ray photons, yet it is capable of holding a vacuum. The
x-rays then strike a 0.5-mm-thick input phosphor [typically CsI(Na)], which
is circular with a diameter ranging between 15 and 40 cm. The x-ray photons
that are absorbed in the input phosphor generate ﬂashes of light that are
channeled toward the photocathode. Photons that travel backward toward the
input window are reﬂected by a 0.5-mm-thick aluminum sheet that supports the
input phosphor.
Figure 5.11
Block diagram of an x-ray
image intensiﬁer (XRII).
Input phosphor
X-rays
Input window
Phosphor Lens
Film camera
TV
camera
Beam
splitter
Anode
Output
window
Light sensor
Photocathode