86 Chapter 3 Image Quality
Note that the part of the overall PSF due to the other individual components
of resolution can be included in this analysis simply by considering h(x, y)t o
be the overall PSF of the system rather than just the PSF of the area sampling
component.
EXAMPLE 3.13
Consider a medical imaging system with sampling period/Delta1in both thex and y directions.
Question What is the highest frequency allowed in the images so that the sampling
is free of aliasing? If an anti-aliasing ﬁlter, whose PSF is modeled as a rect function, is
used and we ignore all the side lobes of its transfer function, what are the widths of the
rect function?
Answer From the Nyquist sampling theorem, we know that if the image contains
frequency higher than 1/2/Delta1, then there will be aliasing. So the highest allowed frequency
is 1/2/Delta1.
If an anti-aliasing ﬁlter is used, the highest frequency of the image being sampled is the
cutoff frequency of the ﬁlter (here, we assume the transfer function of the ﬁlter has value
0 outside the cutoff frequency). In this example, the anti-aliasing ﬁlter is modeled as a
rect function. Its transfer function is given by the sinc function (we ignore the magnitude
of the rect function, since it does not change the cutoff frequency),
H(u, v) = sinc(/Delta1
xu, /Delta1yv),
where /Delta1x and /Delta1y are the widths of the ﬁlter in the x and y directions, respectively.
If we ignore the side lobes of H(u, v), the cutoff frequencies of the ﬁlter are the ﬁrst zeros
of the sinc function, which are 1 //Delta1x and 1//Delta1y. For the given sampling periods /Delta1,w e
must have
1
/Delta1x
≤ 1
2/Delta1 and 1
/Delta1y
≤ 1
2/Delta1,
which is equivalent to
/Delta1x ≥ 2/Delta1and /Delta1y ≥ 2/Delta1.
Figure 3.13 shows the impact of sampling with and without anti-aliasing.
When the sampling period is too small, there is spectral overlap and the resulting
image has artifacts that are most typically seen as high-frequency patterns, as
are visible in Figure 3.13(b). Anti-aliasing low-pass ﬁlters the image before
sampling, making the image blurrier but devoid of artifacts, as is apparent in
Figure 3.13(c).
3.7 Other Effects
3.7.1 Artifacts
A problem that frequently affects image quality is the creation of image features
known as artifacts that do not represent valid anatomical or functional objects.
Artifacts can obscure important targets, and they can be falsely interpreted