3.3 Resolution 67
in terms of the MTFs MTFk(u, v), k = 1, 2,... , K, of the individual subsystems.
This is a direct consequence of (3.9) and the fact that the frequency response
H(u, v) of the overall system is given by
H(u, v) = H1(u, v)H2(u, v) ··· HK(u, v), (3.31)
which is the product of the frequency responses Hk(u, v), k = 1, 2,... , K,o ft h e
individual subsystems.
Figure 3.8 depicts the MTF curves of three subsystems of a medical imaging
system together with the MTF curve of the overall system. If one subsystem has
a small value of the MTF at some spatial frequency, then the MTF of the overall
system will be small at that frequency as well. In other words, the MTF of the
overall system will always be less than the MTF of each subsystem. This follows
from (3.30), which suggests that, for every k = 1, 2,... , K,
MTF(u, v) ≤ MTFk(u, v), for every u, v, (3.32)
provided that MTFk(u, v) ≤ 1, for every k = 1, 2,... , K. Therefore, the overall
quality of a medical imaging system, in terms of contrast and resolution, will be
inferior to the quality of each subsystem.
From the previous discussion, the resolution of a medical imaging system
can be speciﬁed by either its PSF or its LSF. In some medical imaging systems, we
are able to create an object consisting of a very small ‘‘point’’ or ‘‘line’’ of some
material. For example, we may create a very small and highly radioactive point
or line source for measuring the resolution of a nuclear medicine camera. When
a medical imaging system is mathematically modeled using an LSI system, its
output to these objects will be the PSF and the LSF, respectively. This provides
a practical way for calculating these two important response functions.
From our discussion, we can see that spatial resolution and image contrast
are tightly linked, since the Fourier transforms of the PSF and the LSF, which
are measures of resolution, yield the MTF, which is a measure of contrast.
Indeed, spatial resolution can be thought of as the ability of an imaging system
to preserve object contrast in the image, since blurring, due to poor resolution,
is what actually reduces contrast.
In a nonisotropic system, the proﬁle through the PSF changes with orienta-
tion; thus, the system has an orientation-dependent resolution. A good example
Figure 3.8
MTF curves of three
subsystems of a medical
imaging system and the
MTF curve of the overall
system.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
1.0
MTF(u)
mm/H110021
Spatial frequency u
Overall system Subsystem 3
Subsystem 2
Subsystem 1