5.3 Image Formation 155
Figure 5.13
The geometry of a
conventional projection
radiographic system.
Line
X-ray
origin s /H11005 0
s /H11005 r
u
z
d
Detector
plane
Detector
origin
(x, y)
Object
the origin. Suppose that the length of the line segment is r = r(x, y), where it is
made explicit that the length of the line depends on the position ( x, y). Then,
referring to (4.34), the intensity of x-rays incident on the detector at ( x, y)i s
given by
I(x, y) =
∫ Emax
0
S0(E′)E′ exp
{
−
∫ r(x,y)
0
μ(s;E′, x, y)ds
}
dE′ , (5.3)
where S0(E) is the spectrum of the incident x-rays. Given a different line, the
linear attenuation function is usually different since it passes through different
materials; that is whyμ is made explicitly dependent onx and y here. Therefore,
if we were to actually evaluate this double integral, we would have to ﬁrst
determine the function μ(s;E, x, y) for the particular line of interest and then
proceed with the integration. Any photon ‘‘surviving’’ its passage through the
body then hits the detector apparatus (radiographic cassette or digital detector),
and is either absorbed by the detector itself, is absorbed by the detector packaging
including its lead backing, is scattered in an abitrary direction, or exits out the
back of the detector.
5.3.2 Geometric Effects
X-ray images are created from a diverging beam of x-rays (see again Figure 5.13);
this divergence produces a number of undesirable effects that arise from
geometric considerations. These effects are multiplicative; we now study them
in sequence.
Inverse Square Law The inverse square lawstates that the net ﬂux of photons
(i.e., photons per unit area) decreases as 1 /r2, where r is the distance from the
x-ray origin. Assume that the beam intensity integrated over a small sphere
surrounding the source is given by I
S. Let the source-to-detector distance be d,
as shown in Figure 5.13. Let the detector origin ( x = 0 and y = 0) be deﬁned
by the point on the detector whose normal direction passes through the x-ray
source. Then, assuming there is no object causing beam attenuation between the
source and detector, the intensity at the origin of the detector
I
0 = IS
4πd2 . (5.4)