2.2 Signals 19
This result tells us that we can interpret the product of a function with a point impulse as
another point impulse whose volume is equal to the value of the function at the location
of the point impulse.
Two other properties of the point impulse will be used throughout the book.
The scaling propertyof the point impulse is given by
δ(ax, by) = 1
|ab| δ(x, y) . (2.8)
Finally, we occasionally need to use the fact that the point impulse is an even
function; that is,
δ(−x, −y) = δ(x, y) , (2.9)
which follows from (2.8) by setting a = b =− 1.
2.2.2 Line Impulse
When calibrating medical imaging equipment, it is sometimes easier to use a
linelike rather than a pointlike object. For example, it may be easier to position
a wire than a small bead to assess the resolution of a projection radiography
system. For this reason, we would like a mathematical model for a line source.
Consider the set of points deﬁned by
L(ℓ, θ) ={ (x, y) | x cos θ + y sin θ = ℓ} . (2.10)
It can be shown that L(ℓ, θ) is a line whose unit normal is oriented at an angleθ
relative to the x-axis and is at distance ℓ from the origin in the direction of the
unit normal. This geometry can be seen in Figure 2.3(c).
The line impulseδℓ(x, y) associated with line L(ℓ, θ) is given by
δℓ(x, y) = δ(x cos θ + y sin θ − ℓ) . (2.11)
This signal, illustrated in Figure 2.3(c), is effectively a 1-D impulse function
‘‘spread out’’ on the line L(ℓ, θ).
2.2.3 Comb and Sampling Functions
We now consider two functions that are critical to the way medical images
are produced, manipulated, and stored in real-world systems. In such systems,
medical images are not treated as continuous functions, but as discrete functions.
We will have more to say about this in Chapter 3. Here, we introduce these
two critical functions in relation to the other functions being introduced in this
chapter.
We saw above that through the use of a shifted point impulse [within the
double integral in (2.6)], we could ‘‘pick off’’ the value of a function at a single
point. In nearly all medical imaging modalities, we need to pick off values not
just at a single point but on a grid or matrix of points, a process that is called