5.4 Noise and Scattering 169
5.4 Noise and Scattering
Until now, we have only considered the effects of the x-ray source and the
composition of the object. We have implicitly assumed that the intensity of the
x-ray beam at the detector plane is faithfully reproduced by the detector. In
reality, of course, the detector does not faithfully reproduce the incident intensity
distribution. Furthermore, x-rays arrive in discrete packets of energy (quanta or
photons, as discussed in Section 4.3.2). The discrete nature of their arrival can
lead to ﬂuctuations in the image. In the following sections, we discuss some of
the additional factors introduced by x-ray physics and the image recorder.
5.4.1 Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Assuming unity magniﬁcation and inﬁnitesimal source size, a rectangular object,
like that depicted in Figure 5.17, will cast a rectangular shadow on the detector
with dimensions equal to the object dimensions. A 1-D slice through the
intensities on the detector will look like a rect function, as deﬁned by (2.19)
and shown in Figure 5.23. Let I
b be the background intensity and It be the
object (target) intensity on the detector plane, with It > Ib in this example. As
discussed in Section 3.2, the local contrastof this object is given by
C = It − Ib
Ib
. (5.33)
Because the x-rays arrive in discrete quanta (photons), there will be random
ﬂuctuations in the number of photons arriving in each small area of the detector,
leading to noise, as discussed in Section 3.4. This effect is called quantum
mottle, and it is responsible for the imprecision of detector measurements of
x-ray intensity.
We can quantify the effect of noise on image formation using the concept
of SNR, as presented in Section 3.5. The higher the SNR, the less evident will
be the granularity in the image resulting from this quantum effect. In this
scenario, the ‘‘signal’’ is It − Ib, the difference between the target intensity and
the background intensity. The noise is caused by quantum-related ﬂuctuations
in the background, and it can be characterized by a standard deviation σb.
Therefore, the basic SNR in this scenario is given by
SNR = It − Ib
σb
= CIb
σb
. (5.34)
Figure 5.23
Detector intensities from
a rectangular object.
It
Ib
Object
Background
x