3.6 Sampling 85
we can see why undersampled signals tend to show high-frequency artifacts: The
overlap of high-frequency spectra in the aliased Fourier transform artiﬁcially
boosts high-frequency content.
3.6.3 Anti-Aliasing Filters
In medical imaging systems, there is an inherent trade-off between the number
of samples acquired by a detector and image quality. Acquiring a large number
of samples typically produces the highest image resolution but is almost always
either expensive or time-consuming. Reducing the number of samples may lead to
aliasing, which will introduce unwanted artifacts into the image. An alternative
is to ﬁrst ﬁlter the continuous signal using a low-pass ﬁlter, and then sample
with fewer samples. In this case, the image is degraded by blurring rather than
aliasing artifacts, which is usually preferable. Such a low-pass ﬁlter is called an
anti-aliasing ﬁlter, and must be applied before sampling.
Anti-aliasing ﬁltering is often an inherent part of a medical imaging instru-
ment because the true continuous signal is blurred by the impulse response of
the system. It is useful to consider two sources of blurring, that caused by the
inherent physics and geometry of the system and that caused by the detectors
themselves. Ideally, the physics and geometry cause only a small amount of
blurring and therefore a high frequency signal is presented to the detectors.
Although this situation is highly dependent on the modality, it would be fairly
accurate to say that very little anti-aliasing is accomplished by the physics and
geometry of the system.
Anti-aliasing is more often accomplished by the detectors, which (in most
cases) integrate the incident signal over the area of each detector. This additional
integration, which is still part of the overall PSF of the system, provides
additional low-pass ﬁltering prior to sampling. Since the detectors are not point
samplers, it is incorrect to model the discretization of a medical imaging system
as the multiplication of the incident signal f (x, y) with the sampling function
δ
s(x, y;/Delta1x, /Delta1y). Instead, the effect of detector integration can be modeled by
ﬁrst convolving f (x, y) with the PSF h(x, y) of the detector. The overall detector
system PSF is the result of the cascade of PSFs that characterize the individual
components of resolution, including the detector’s geometric resolution. Here
we focus on a speciﬁc component of resolution: any sampling process that is
not point sampling. In many cases, the sampling is area sampling rather than
point sampling. This occurs when the detector is either intrinsically digital (i.e.,
it is a pixelated detector) or its output is represented by an array of pixels.
In either case, the PSF of the area sampling component can be represented
by a rect function [(2.16)], and the sampling process can be mathematically
modeled by
f
d(m, n) = fs(m/Delta1x, n/Delta1y) , (3.80)
fs(x, y) = [h(x, y) ∗ f (x, y)] δs(x, y;/Delta1x, /Delta1y) . (3.81)
Since integration is a low-pass process, this resembles the anti-aliasing ﬁltering
approach described above: The continuous signal f (x, y) is ﬁrst ﬁltered by a
low-pass ﬁlter with PSF h(x, y), from which fd(m, n) is obtained by sampling.