4.2 Ionization 107
computed tomography (Chapter 6), planar scintigraphy (Chapter 8), and emis-
sion computed tomography (Chapter 9). We start by describing the basic
physical properties of the atom and the concepts of excitation and ioniza-
tion. We then describe ionizing radiation in a more general context, concluding
with its measurement and interaction with biological tissues.
4.2 Ionization
Ionization is the ejection of an electron from an atom, creating a free electron
and an ion. Radiation that carries enough energy to ionize an atom is called
ionizing radiation. Here, the term radiation covers a broad range of physical
phenomena. For example, visible light, x-rays, gamma rays, and electron beams
are all examples of radiation. High-energy EM waves such as x-rays and gamma
rays are ionizing radiations; light is not. Particulate radiations such as an electron
beam may be ionizing depending on the energy each particle possesses. We now
discuss the structure of atoms and the process of ionization in more detail.
4.2.1 Atomic Structure
Today’s concept of atomic structure is based on a quantum mechanical picture
of the atom (from the 1920s), which in turn arose from the Bohr model of
the hydrogen atom (in 1913). An atom consists of a nucleus of protons and
neutrons, which together are called nucleons, surrounded by orbiting electrons.
A common visualization of atomic structure, sometimes called the planetary
atom, is shown in Figure 4.1. The atomic number Z is equal to the number
of protons in the nucleus and deﬁnes the element. Each proton has a positive
charge equal in magnitude and opposite in charge to that of each electron. Since
an atom as a whole is electrically neutral, there are an equal number of electrons
and protons in an atom; hence, Z also represents the number of electrons in the
atom. A short table of the elements is given in Table 4.1.
The mass number Aof an atom is equal to the number of nucleons in the
nucleus. The term nuclide refers to any unique combination of protons and
neutrons forming a nucleus. Nuclides are typically denoted by either
A
ZX or X-A,
where X is the element symbol. For example, 12
6 C and C-12 are both symbols
for the most abundant carbon atom. Notice that the element symbol and atomic
number are redundant.
As indicated in Table 4.1, the number of neutrons in a given nucleus is
approximately equal to the number of protons; and certain combinations are
stable, while others are unstable. Unstable nuclides are called radionuclides,
Figure 4.1
The planetary atom: a
common (and useful)
visualization of atomic
structure.
Protons
Neutrons
Electrons