194 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
conducted in which helical CT images were used to detect liver lesions. In this
study, it was found that reviewers could detect 86–92% of the lesions using all
the data, but only 82–85% of the lesions using every other slice. Most clinicians
are looking to image processing and computer vision techniques—for example,
virtual reality—to reduce the amount of time it takes to read this enormous
volume of data. At the same time, it is believed that considerably improved
diagnostic accuracy can be achieved.
6.2.2 X-Ray Source and Collimation
Most commercial medical CT scanners use just one x-ray source due to the initial
cost and maintenance costs associated with x-ray tubes. In most respects, the
x-ray tubes in CT scanners are just like those in projection radiography systems.
All use the rotating anode design and are oil-cooled to reduce heat damage to
the anode. Some CT scanners operate in pulse mode but most continuously
excite the x-ray tube during data acquisition. In most cases, cool-down periods
are required between scans to avoid heat damage to the x-ray tube. Even so,
with 20 to 30 exposures per examination and 20–30 examinations per day, the
x-ray tubes in CT scanners often wear out in less than one year. Maintaining
the x-ray tubes through regular calibration and replacing them quite often adds
considerably to the cost of operating a CT scanner.
The x-rays generated by a CT x-ray tube require collimation and ﬁltration
that is somewhat different than that in projection radiography systems. For one,
CT typically requires a fan-beam geometry rather than the cone-beam geometry
used in projection radiography. Collimation into a fan, typically between 30
and 60 degrees in fan angle, is accomplished using two pieces of lead that form
a slit between them. This collimator is placed as close to the patient as possible,
just outside a protective plexiglass tube so that the geometry of the fan has the
most constant thickness possible through the patient. A motor controls how
wide the slit is so that the fan thickness (or height)—typically 1–10 mm—can
be selected by the operator. In MDCT systems, the thickness of the fan is
typically larger than in single-slice systems in order to cover the width (perhaps
4–16 cm) of the multiple detector rows, but otherwise the principle is the same.
The x-rays pass through a mirror, which can be optically illuminated from
below in order to create lines on the patient showing the position and thickness
of the x-ray collimation to be used during the scan.
As we will see in Section 6.3, CT image formation requires the x-ray source
to be approximated as a monoenergetic source. In order to make the actual
CT x-ray source more monoenergetic in practice, more ﬁltering is employed
than is typical in projection radiography systems. Generally, copper followed
by aluminum is used to narrow the energy spectrum (‘‘harden the beam’’) of the
x-rays entering the patient. Such ﬁltration was discussed in Section 5.2.2.
6.2.3 Dual-Energy CT
Dual-energy imaging is a way to gather more information about tissue char-
acteristics since the linear attenuation of all tissues is a function of energy.
This strategy is used in dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry projection scanning to
determine bone mineral density in the diagnosis of osteoporosis and is now being