80 Chapter 3 Image Quality
the average photon count per unit area λb). To achieve a desirable differential SNR, it is
required that
λb = SNR2
diff
C2A . (3.71)
This relationship was ﬁrst suggested by Albert Rose and is known as the Rose model.
Clearly, to maintain good image quality (i.e., to obtain images with high SNR), high
radiation dose is required when viewing small, low-contrast objects.
3.5.4 Decibels
The SNR is sometimes given in decibels (dB). When the SNR is the ratio of
amplitudes, such as with the amplitude SNR or the differential SNR, then
SNR (in dB) = 20 × log10 SNR (ratio of amplitudes) . (3.72)
When the SNR is the ratio of powers, such as with the power SNR, then
SNR (in dB) = 10 × log10 SNR (ratio of powers) . (3.73)
3.6 Sampling
To electronically sense, store, and process continuous signals using computers,
we must transform them into collections of numbers. This transformation, called
discretization or sampling, means that we only retain representative signal values
and discard the rest. There are many ways to do this. In this book, we focus
our attention on the so-called rectangular sampling scheme. According to this
scheme, a 2-D continuous signal is replaced by a discrete signal whose values
are the values of the continuous signal at the vertices of a 2-D rectangular
grid. More precisely, given a 2-D continuous signalf (x, y), rectangular sampling
generates a 2-D discrete signal f
d(m, n), such that
fd(m, n) = f (m/Delta1x, n/Delta1y), for m, n = 0, 1,.... (3.74)
In (3.74), /Delta1x and /Delta1y are the sampling periods in the x and y directions,
respectively. This is illustrated in Figure 3.12. Notice that fd(m, n) forms an
array of numbers that contains the values of the 2-D continuous signal f (x, y)
at the discrete points ( m/Delta1x, n/Delta1y). The inverses 1//Delta1x and 1//Delta1y of /Delta1x and /Delta1y
are referred to as the sampling frequenciesin the x and y direction, respectively.
As shown below, these sampling frequencies are related to the comb and
sampling functions presented in Chapter 2.
Ideally, we would like to keep as few samples as possible. This strategy
minimizes the number of detectors (or the scanning time needed by a single
detector) and reduces signal storage and subsequent processing requirements. So
we ask: Given a 2-D continuous signal f (x, y), what are the maximum possible
values for /Delta1x and /Delta1y such that f (x, y) can be reconstructed from the 2-D discrete
signal f
d(m, n), obtained by (3.74)? As illustrated in Figure 3.12, we may be
tempted to perform coarse sampling as opposed to ﬁne sampling. However, if