232 Chapter 6 Computed Tomography
them no matter what their orientation relative to the pixel area. What
is the minimum number of detectors you must use?
You decide to use 925 detectors, each 0.8 mm wide and ﬁt side-by-side on
a line. You decide to place the x-ray source 180 cm away from the center
of the detector array (orthogonal to the array, of course).
(b) Will your FOV ﬁt within the fan? Explain your answer.
Suppose μ = 0.2c m−1 and suppose there are an average of 1 .5 × 1011
photons hitting the detector array for each projection.
(c) What is the approximate SNR in dB of a tumor mass whose linear
attenuation coefﬁcient is 0.25cm−1.
6.31 You have the good fortune to acquire a used 3G CT scanner that has slip
ring technology (continuously rotating 360-degree x-ray tube and detector
array). Everything is in good working order except that only one detector
channel is operational. Fortunately, you are able to switch this channel
between detectors so that you can acquire data from any detector, but
from only one detector for each pulse of the x-ray tube. The tube can
be pulsed continuously at a rate of one pulse per millisecond. The gantry
can rotate at one revolution per second. The geometry of the fan beam is
shown in Figure P6.4.
Figure P6.4
Scanner geometry for
Problem 6.31.
50 cm
70 cm
35 cm
Detector array
X-ray source
(a) Determine the fan angle from the depicted geometry.
(b) Suppose 703 detectors are packed into the array depicted. Determine
the spacing between the detectors.
(c) Suppose data from only the central detector is acquired (as fast as
possible) over a single counterclockwise rotation of the gantry (from
the x-ray source on the top back to the x-ray source on the top).
What line integrals are acquired? Draw the trajectory of data acquired
over this one acquisition cycle on a sinogram diagram. Are any line
integrals repeated? Explain.
(d) Now suppose that data from only the bottom-left detector (with
reference to Figure P6.4) is acquired, again over a single counter-
clockwise rotation of the gantry with the fastest possible rotation
and x-ray tube pulsing. What line integrals are acquired this time?