246 Chapter 7 The Physics of Nuclear Medicine
A positron is actually an antimatter electron having a +1 charge and the same
rest mass as that of an electron. The neutrino, emitted with the positron, is
a massless, chargeless subatomic particle. For a given radionuclide undergoing
positron decay, the total kinetic energy of the positron plus the neutrino is a
constant; however, the division of this total energy among the positron and
neutrino varies from emission to emission.
Since a positron is an antimatter electron, an ‘‘unusual’’ atomic process
occurs when a positron and electron meet. After a positron is emitted, it travels
a short distance (several millimeters) in the material in which it is emitted,
depositing its kinetic energy. (Its kinetic energy is transferred to the material by
both collisional and radiative transfer, just as with a beta particle or energetic
electron.) It then meets a free electron in the tissue, and—because the positron
is an antimatter electron—mutual annihilation occurs. From conservation of
energy, two 511 keV annihilation photons appear (511 keV is the energy equiva-
lent to the rest mass of an electron or positron fromE = mc
2); from conservation
of momentum, they are emitted 180◦ back-to-back.
Atoms that undergo positron decay have an alternative decay mode—the
nucleus can actually capture an electron:
p + e− → n + ν.
Typically, an inner shell (K or L shell) electron is captured as these are in
the closest physical proximity to the nucleus. A given radionuclide source will
undergo electron capture at a certain fraction of time, and positron decays the
other, but a given atom will (of course) only undergo decay once, by one of the
two possible modes.
7.4.2 Isomeric Transition
A radionuclide may decay to a more stable nuclide that has the same atomic and
mass numbers; both the parent and daughter are not only the same element but
the same isotope of that element. In such a case, the parent usually represents
a transient, metastable state with higher energy. This excess energy is released
in the form of gamma rays. Recall from Chapter 4 that gamma rays are in
practice indistinguishable from the x-rays that are now familiar to you. (Some
textbooks indicate that the distinction between x-rays and gamma rays is based
on wavelength or energy, but it is actually based on site of origin: gamma rays
from the nucleus and x-rays from the electron cloud. In practice, most gamma
rays have higher energies than many x-rays; hence, the common but incorrect
distinction is based on wavelength or energy.)
An example of an isomeric transition is
Cs-137 → Ba-137m → Ba-137 + γ , (7.9)
where γ represents the 662 keV gamma ray photon released when Ba-137m
decays to Ba-137. Here, the ‘‘m’’ in Ba-137m represents the metastable
state.