6.3 Image Formation 197
be capable of ‘‘docking’’ with the scanner and locked into place so that motor-
controlled positioning of the patient can be accomplished. Typically, there are
positioning lights that can illuminate the patient to show the technician where
the slice(s) will be acquired. The table can then be moved to position the patient
under the guide lights in order to acquire the desired image(s).
6.3 Image Formation
6.3.1 Line Integrals
In a CT system, the x-ray tube makes a short burst of x-rays that propagate
(generally in a fan-beam geometry) through a cross section of the patient. The
detectors detect the exit beam intensity integrated along a line between the x-ray
source and each detector. As presented in Chapter 5 [see (5.3)], the (integrated)
x-ray intensity at any given detector is given by
I
d =
∫ Emax
0
S0(E)E exp
[
−
∫ d
0
μ(s;E)ds
]
dE , (6.1)
where S0(E) is the x-ray spectrum andμ(s;E) is the linear attenuation coefﬁcient
along the line between the source and detector.
Unfortunately, the integration over energy in (6.1), while physically correct,
is in a mathematically intractable form for CT image reconstruction (to be
discussed in Section 6.3.3). To get around this, we use the concept of effective
energy, E, which is deﬁned as the energy that, in a given material, will produce
the same measured intensity from a monoenergetic source as is measured using
the actual polyenergetic source. This concept was ﬁrst presented in Example 4.4.
Given this concept, it is correct to say that
I
d = I0 exp
[
−
∫ d
0
μ(s;E) ds
]
. (6.2)
Given a measurement of Id and knowledge of I0, (6.2) can be rearranged to
yield a basic projection measurement gd,
gd =− ln
( Id
I0
)
(6.3)
=
∫ d
0
μ(s;E) ds . (6.4)
Thus, we can make a very important observation about the function of a CT
scanner: The basic measurement of a CT scanner is a line integral of the linear
attenuation coefﬁcient at the effective energy of the scanner.
In an actual CT system, the reference intensity I
0 must be measured for
each detector; this is a calibration step. In fan-beam systems, an auxiliary
measurement is typically made using a detector positioned at the end of the
array so that there is always air between the source and this detector. Using this
measurement, the reference intensities for the other detectors can be determined
using prior calibration data of all detectors taken in air.