1.5 Computed Tomography 9
all projection radiographic methods. True tomography, the imaging of a 2-D
slice of the 3-D body, cannot be directly accomplished using any modality in
projection radiography. More details about projection radiography are given in
Chapter 5.
1.5 Computed Tomography
As in projection radiography, CT uses x-rays. Unlike projection radiography,
however, CT collects multiple projections of the same tissues from different
orientations by moving the x-ray source around the body. CT systems have
rows of digital detectors whose signals are input directly to a computer, and
these signals are used to reconstruct one or more cross sections (slices) of
the human body. In this way, although CT systems acquire projections that
represent a ‘‘shadow’’ of the body, they generate truly tomographic images after
reconstruction.
The important historical phases in CT development are single-slice CT,
helical CT, and multiple-row detector CT (MDCT). Single-slice CT systems
acquire data within a single plane and reconstruct only one plane per rotation. In
helical CT systems, the x-ray tube and detectors continuously rotate around in a
large circle, while the patient is moved in a continuous motion through the circle’s
center. From the patient’s perspective, the x-ray tube carves out a helix; hence,
the name helical CT. The importance of this technique is in its ability to rapidly
acquire 3-D data, such as a whole body scan, in less than a minute. In MDCT
systems, there are many rows of detectors used to rapidly gather acone of x-ray
data, comprising a 2-D projection of the 3-D patient. When the x-ray source and
detectors revolve rapidly around the patient (one to two revolutions per second),
very quick (near real-time) 3-D imaging is possible using these CT scanners.
A typical CT scanner is shown in Figure 1.2(a). In the center of the picture,
we can see the cylindrical opening in which the patient lies; a patient table is also
visible. Around the cylindrical opening is a housing containing both the x-ray
tube and the detector array. The gantry holding these components is capable
of spinning rapidly around the patient. The computer displays and keyboard in
the foreground are used for entering patient data and viewing images. Although
CT images can be printed on paper or ﬁlm, the images are completely digital in
nature since they are computed from the measured projections. The CT image
Figure 1.2
(a) A CT scanner and
(b) a CT image of a slice
through the liver.
Source: Courtesy of GE
Healthcare.
(a) (b)