Projection
Radiography
CHAPTER
55
5.1 Introduction
Projection radiography, sometimes calledconventional radiography, refers to the
most commonly used method of medical imaging utilizing x-rays. A conventional
radiograph represents a projection of the three-dimensional volume of the body
onto a two-dimensional imaging surface. The term projection will be deﬁned
more rigorously shortly, but conceptually, the projection radiograph represents
the transmission of the x-ray beam through the patient, weighted by the
integrated loss of beam energy due to scattering and absorption in the body. The
primary radiographic image is a two-dimensional display of these transmitted
intensities. It is useful to think of a projection radiograph as a shadow cast by a
semitransparent body illuminated by x-rays.
There are many types of projection radiography systems in common use.
While their overall system designs have common elements, there are different
clinical requirements, which make the details differ. Three examples, represen-
tative of the breadth of possibilities required by different clinical requirements,
are shown in Figure 5.1.
Overall, the advantages of projection radiographic systems include short
exposure time (0.1 second), the production of a large area image (e.g., 14× 17 in),
low cost, low radiation exposure (3–4 mR for a chest radiograph, roughly equiva-
lent to about one-hundredth of the annual background dose exclusive of medical
imaging procedures), and excellent contrast and spatial resolution. Projection
radiography is used to screen for pneumonia, heart disease, lung disease, bone
fractures, cancer, and vascular disease. Typically, the chest x-ray is the most
common imaging examination performed in a hospital. Its major limitation is
the lack of depth resolution—superimpositions of shadows from overlying and
underlying tissues sometimes ‘‘hide’’ important details and limit contrast.
In this chapter, we describe the components of standard projection radiog-
raphy systems, develop mathematical models to characterize image formation,
describe the factors affecting image quality, and look at several applications and
special techniques for projection radiography systems.
135