9.3 Image Quality in SPECT and PET 319
not eliminated until the object size is approximately three times the resolution
of the imaging system. These effects, which also apply to the axial resolution
(sometimes mistakenly called ‘‘slice thickness’’) of a tomographic scanner, are
referred to as partial volume effects.
9.3.2 Attenuation and Scatter
The photons detected in nuclear medicine imaging are electromagnetic radiation.
As such, they undergo two major types of interactions in tissue—photoelectric
effect and Compton scattering—as discussed in Chapter 4. The photoelectric
effect results in complete absorption of the photon, reducing observed count rate,
while scattered photons are still detected. Since attenuation is a combination
of absorption (by the photoelectric effect) and scatter (by Compton scattering),
correction schemes can either treat these processes independently or jointly.
As ﬁrst discussed in Section 5.4.3 in the context of projection radiography,
large-angle scatter produces a low-level background ‘‘haze’’ in the image, which
reduces contrast [see (5.41)]. This reduction in contrast arises from the addition
of this scatter background, rather than a reduction in f
max or an increase in fmin
per se, as discussed above in the context of resolution effects and in (3.1). Event
C in Figure 9.11 depicts a scatter coincidence in PET.
Absorption produces a gradual, progressive underestimation of radioactivity
from the edge to the center of the body, by about a factor of ﬁve to as much as
50, depending on body size, photon energy, and SPECT versus PET detection
(since comparison of (9.6) and (9.20) indicates that, for SPECT, the photon only
has to travel through part of the body, whereas for PET, the sum of the two
annihilation photons’ travel distance is always the complete body thickness).
The same physics and mathematics that make ‘‘perfect’’ attenuation correction
at least theoretically achievable in PET, but not in SPECT, make the effects of
attenuation itself more dramatic in PET than in SPECT. This is counterintuitive
given the difference in photon energies of the commonly used radionuclides
for PET and SPECT. In PET, the main photon energy and linear attenuation
coefﬁcient (for water) are 511 keV and 0.095 cm
−1, respectively, while for
SPECT they are 140 keV and 0.145 cm −1. (Note that the difference in energy
is a factor of 3.7, but the difference in attenuation coefﬁcients is only about
50 percent.) The underlying basis for higher attenuation in PET is the fact that
Figure 9.11
Coincidence counting in
PET. B represents a true
coincidence, A and D
random or accidental
coincidences, and C
scattered coincidence.
70
10
A
CB
D
20
3040
50
60