150 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
leaving ‘‘holes’’ in the europium; it is these holes that represent the latent image
that is stored in the PSP. Latent images last for hours, but as electrons ﬁnd
ways to recombine with the holes, they will be unrecoverable after a few days
of storage.
PSPs must be processed in order to recover the latent image. From the
viewpoint of work ﬂow in a radiology clinic, this aspect of CR bears great
similarity to that of ﬁlm-based radiography, which is one reason (once price
dropped and quality improved) why CR became a natural way to transition to
digital radiography from ﬁlm-based systems. To make it even easier to transition,
the CR cassette, as shown in Figure 5.12, can often be used directly in place of the
ﬁlm-screen cassette in existing systems. But unlike ﬁlm, there are no chemicals
involved in recovering the radiographic image in CR. Instead, reading a PSP
involves use of a focused laser, which stimulates the trapped electrons so that
they will recombine with the holes and produce light. To do this, a mechanical
device, much like the paper roller in a laser printer, is used to slide the PSP to a
position where a focused laser is scanned across a row of the PSP; the PSP is then
slid to a new position and a new row is scanned, and so on. At each position
of the laser, which is approximately 700 nm in wavelength and therefore red in
color, blue light is emitted from the PSP in proportion to the number of trapped
electrons that are liberated by the laser excitation. This emitted light is directed
by mirrors toward a photodetector that is sensitive only to blue light, and the
resultant electrical signal is digitized using an analog to digital converter (ADC).
This produces a digital value—a pixel value—that is proportional to the x-ray
intensity at the spot on the PSP being probed by the laser.
Since the PSP is by design ‘‘raster scanned’’ row-by-row, the resulting
data comprise rectilinear samples of a digital image, which can be directly
manipulated and stored on a computer and displayed on a digital display. The
density of spatial samples during scanning affects the resolution of the system,
and the number of bits per pixel in the ADC affects the overall dynamic range of
the system. For example, high-resolution systems might sample at 10 pixels/mm
and each pixel value might be represented by a 16-bit digital word. The dynamic
Figure 5.12
A computed radiography
(CR) cassette. Image
courtesy of GE
Healthcare.
