240 Chapter 7 The Physics of Nuclear Medicine
7.2 Nomenclature
Recall from Chapter 4 that an atom consists of a nucleus of protons and
neutrons, which together are called nucleons, surrounded by orbiting electrons.
The atomic number Z is equal to the number of protons in the nucleus and
deﬁnes the element. The mass number Ais equal to the number of nucleons in
the nucleus. The term nuclide refers to any unique combination of protons and
neutrons that forms a nucleus. If a particular nuclide is radioactive (i.e., it can
undergo radioactive decay), it is termed a radionuclide. Nuclides are typically
denoted by either A
ZX or X-A, where X is the element symbol.
Atoms with the same atomic number but different mass number (i.e., dif-
ferent numbers of neutrons) are called isotopes. For example, carbon-11 is an
isotope of carbon that decays by positron decay and is used in positron emission
tomography, as discussed in Chapter 9. Because isotopes have the same number
of protons (and hence electrons), they are chemically identical. Atoms with the
same mass number but different atomic numbers are calledisobars. For example,
carbon-11 decays to boron-11; the two are isobars. Atoms with the same number
of neutrons are called isotones. Atoms with the same atomic and mass number
(i.e., the same nuclide) but with different energy levels are called isomers.F o r
example, technetium-99m decays to technetium-99; the two are isomers.
This nomenclature becomes important when we consider the radionuclides
used in nuclear medicine. Radioactive isotopes of certain elements serve as the
source of ionizing radiation that we image in nuclear medicine. As discussed
below, we are particularly interested in obtaining certain radiations that drive
our choice of nuclides.
7.3 Radioactive Decay
7.3.1 Mass Defect and Binding Energy
The sum of the masses of the constituents of an atom (i.e., the protons, neutrons,
and electrons) is greater than the atom’s actual mass. The difference between
the sum of the masses of the atom’s constituents and the actual mass is called
the mass defect.
As an example, consider stable carbon-12. An atom of carbon-12 has
6 protons, 6 neutrons, and 6 electrons. On the atomic scale, it is common to
express mass in uniﬁed atomic mass units(u), where 1 u is exactly 1/12 the mass
of a carbon-12 atom. The mass of a proton is 1.007276 u, the mass of a neutron
is 1.008665 u, and the mass of an electron is 0.000548 u. The mass defect of
carbon-12 is therefore 6 × 1.008665 + 6 × 1.007276 + 6 × 0.000548 − 12 =
0.098934 u.
Einstein’s famous relationship, E = mc
2, states that mass and energy are
related and that matter and energy cannot be created or destroyed, they can
only be transformed from one form into the other. Since mass and energy are
related by Einstein’s equation, there is an amount of energy ‘‘missing’’ from the
atom (equivalent to the mass defect) that would otherwise be predicted to be
present based on the constituents of that atom. This missing energy is termed
the binding energyand can be computed fromE = /Delta1mc
2, where /Delta1m is the mass
defect and c is the speed of light (3 × 108 m/s). The unit of energy that we have