144 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Figure 5.9
A typical x-ray grid.
Radius
X-rays
X-ray tube
Interspace material
Lead strips
Height, h
Width, b
In nuclear medicine, where inherently monoenergetic radiation is used,
energy-sensitive detectors can be used to discriminate between the primary
radiation and the scattered radiation, which has lower energy photons. However,
this concept cannot be employed in conventional radiography because the
radiation that emerges from an x-ray tube is inherently polyenergetic and because
an integrated measurement of beam intensity is made. Instead, there are three
other methods used in conventional radiography to reduce the effects of scatter:
(1) grids, (2) airgaps, and (3) scanning slits. We now describe these in detail.
Grids Scatter-reducing grids use thin strips of lead alternating with highly
transmissive interspace material, typically aluminum and sometimes plastic. A
typical x-ray grid is shown in Figure 5.9. This linear, focused grid has lead
strips that are arranged in lines and angled toward the x-ray tube. By careful
placement of the grid, photons that travel from the source to the detector pass
through the interspace material and are not severely attenuated by the grid.
Photons that arise from Compton scattering within the patient, however, travel
off-axis, intercept the lead strips, and are absorbed in the grid.
Other combinations of grid geometries are sometimes used as well. For
example, ‘‘crosshatch’’ grids have lead strips arranged in an actual grid pattern
(as in the original design of Gustav Bucky), and ‘‘parallel’’ grids have lead strips
that are parallel to each other (so that the focal radius is inﬁnite). Linear grids,
however, have the advantage that the x-ray beam can be angulated along the
grid line direction, allowing adjustments of the viewing angle. Furthermore,
focused grids have the advantage that very few x-rays are actually blocked by
the geometry of the grid.
The effectiveness of the grid for reducing scatter is a function of the grid
ratio, deﬁned as
grid ratio = h
b , (5.1)
where h is the height of the lead strips and b is the spacing between the lead
strips (see Figure 5.9). This fraction is generally reported as a normalized ratio
in which the denominator is unity. Grid ratios ranging from 6:1 to 16:1 are used
in conventional radiographic systems and can be as low as 2:1 in mammography
systems. Grid spacing is generally reported using its reciprocal, which is known
as grid frequency, which ranges from 60 cm
−1 for conventional radiographic
systems to as much as 80 cm−1 for mammography systems.