8.2 Instrumentation 257
Figure 8.2
Different types
of collimators:
(a) parallel-hole,
(b) converging,
(c) diverging, and
(d) pinhole.
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
collimator holes were circular in cross section. This meant that the lead septa
were thicker in some areas than in others. Today, collimators have square,
hexagonal, or triangular holes, and the septa are of uniform thickness around
each hole.
Converging and diverging collimators are available as well but less frequently
used in practice. A converging collimator, shown in Figure 8.2(b), has an array
of tapered holes that aim at a point—the focal point—some distance in front of
the collimator. The image that is presented to the crystal is a magniﬁed version
of the real object. A diverging collimator, shown in Figure 8.2(c), is essentially
an upside-down converging collimator. Diverging collimators have an array of
tapered holes that diverge from a hypothetical focal point behind the crystal. In
this case, the image presented to the crystal face is smaller than the real object.
Since converging and diverging collimators are simply ﬂipped versions of each
other, some collimator carriages actually have an insert that can be ﬂipped either
way, in effect producing two collimators in one (a div/con collimator).
EXAMPLE 8.1
When a converging or diverging collimator is used in an Anger camera, the image on the
crystal face is not of the same size as that of the object.
Question Using a diverging collimator with a focal length of zf , what is the ratio
between the size of the image and the size of the actual object when a planar object is
placed parallel to the crystal face at a distance z away from the collimator face?
Answer For a diverging collimator, only the photons traveling towards the focal point
can be detected. (Others will be absorbed by the collimator walls.) Using geometry and
ignoring the height of the collimator, we have the ratio between the size of the image and
the size of the actual object as
Si
So
= zf
z + zf
.
Pinhole collimators comprise a different class of collimators. As shown in
Figure 8.2(d), these are thick conical collimators with a single 2–5 mm hole in
the bottom center. As the source object is moved away from the pinhole, its
image on the scintillation crystal gets smaller. However, the image is not always
magniﬁed (or miniﬁed) compared with the object. In fact, the camera image is
magniﬁed (i.e., larger than real size) from the collimator face to a distance equal
to the length of the collimator and is then progressively smaller (miniﬁed) at
larger distances.