1.7 Ultrasound Imaging 11
Figure 1.3
(a) A SPECT scanner and
(b) a series of SPECT
heart scans.
Source: Courtesy of GE
Healthcare.
(a) (b)
1.7 Ultrasound Imaging
Ultrasound imaging uses electrical-to-acoustical transducers to generate repeti-
tive bursts of high-frequency sound. These pulses travel into the soft tissue of
the body and reﬂect back to the transducer. The time-of-return of these pulses
gives information about the location (depth) of a reﬂector, and the intensity
of these pulses gives information about the strength of a reﬂector. By rapidly
moving or scanning the transducer or its acoustical beam, real-time images of
cross sections of soft tissue can be generated. Ultrasound imaging systems are
comparatively inexpensive and completely noninvasive; therefore, these systems
are widespread and in common usage. They are designed primarily to image
anatomy and, although their image quality in some ways is not as good as other
anatomical imaging modalities such as CT and MRI, they are real-time and
highly adaptable to a wide variety of imaging goals.
Ultrasound imaging systems offer several imaging modalities:
• A-mode imaging, which generates a one-dimensional waveform, and as such
does not really comprise an image. This mode, however, can provide very
detailed information about rapid or subtle motion (e.g., of a heart valve).
• B-mode imaging, which is ordinary cross-sectional anatomical imaging.
There are several arrangements of transducers that can give rise to images
with different appearances.
• M-mode imaging, which generates a succession of A-mode signals, brightness
modulated and displayed in real time on a computer display. M-mode
generates an image that does not represent a cross section of anatomy but
is important for measuring time-varying displacements of, for example, a
heart valve.
• Doppler imaging, which uses the property of frequency or phase shift caused
by moving objects (like a police siren that has a higher frequency when
approaching and a lower frequency when departing) to generate images that
are color coded by their motion. Doppler is most commonly used, however,
in an audio mode. Running the frequency shifts through speakers allows an
aural analysis of motion which is not possible with a visual display.
• Nonlinear imaging, which permits higher resolution imaging at greater
depths and also permits imaging certain tissue properties.