242 Chapter 7 The Physics of Nuclear Medicine
protons repel each other when separated by a distance greater than the diameter
of a nucleus. Within the nucleus, however, an attractive force, the nuclear
or strong force, is responsible for holding neutrons and protons together.
The energy required to separate the constituent protons and neutrons in a
nucleus is the nuclear binding energy.
Radioactive decayis the process by which an atom rearranges its constituent
protons and neutrons to end up with lower inherent energy. Radioactive decay
occurs spontaneously, and energy is released in the process. The result of
radioactive decay is an atom (the daughter atom) with less inherent energy than
that which preceded it (the radioactive parent atom). This change in energy is
reﬂected in the nuclear binding energy discussed above. Since binding energy is
the amount of energy missing from an atom, the daughter atom has a higher
binding energy per nucleon than the parent atom.
7.3.2 Line of Stability
If the different unique combinations of protons and neutrons as a nucleus that
are found in nature are cataloged, they can be separated into two groups:
nonradioactive nuclides, which are stable, and radioactive nuclides, which are
called radionuclides. In general, the total number of nucleons, and the ratio of
neutrons to protons, determine whether a nuclide is stable or radioactive.
A graph of the number of neutrons as a function of the number of protons
for each unique stable nuclide produces a curve that follows the line of identity
at low to intermediate atomic numbers (i.e., the nucleus has the same number
of protons as neutrons), and then diverges up, so that for stable nuclides at
higher atomic numbers there are more neutrons than protons in the nucleus.
This curve, shown in Figure 7.2, is called the line of stability, because it depicts
the data from all the stable nuclides. (It is called a ‘‘line’’ in practice even though
it is not a straight line.) When plotted on the same graph, radionuclides fall
off this line of stability. One way of conceptualizing radioactive decay is as the
attempt of any radioactive atom that is ‘‘off’’ of this line of stability to reach the
line of stability. In order to move toward the line of stability, an atom changes
its proton to neutron ratio in the process of radioactive decay.
The greater the binding energy per nucleon, the more stable the atom.
Thus, a second way to conceptualize radioactive decay is as a process an atom
undergoes to increase its binding energy per nucleon. Since the daughter atom
will always have a higher binding energy per nucleon than the parent atom,
Figure 7.2
Stable elements having
proton/neutron pairings
that lie on the line of
stability.
20 40 60 80 100
Number of protons, Z
Number of neutrons, N
20
40
60
80
100
120
Stable
nuclides
Z /H11005 N