68 Chapter 3 Image Quality
of this situation is in ultrasound imaging systems where the range resolution
(along the transducer axis) is usually substantially better than the lateral reso-
lution (orthogonal to the transducer axis). (See Chapters 10 and 11 for more
details.) In the nonisotropic case, the MTF is given by (3.9).
It is also possible for a medical imaging system to be linear but not shift-
invariant. Then, the resolution is spatially dependent. For example, this situation
exists in ultrasound systems because the acoustic energy spreads out with
increasing distance from the transducer. This makes the FWHM increase with
depth, which corresponds to a degradation of lateral resolution. Magniﬁcation
in pinhole collimators, or focused collimators in nuclear medicine, also leads
to spatially dependent resolution, in which case the image plane resolution is
related, in a precise geometric way, to actual resolution within the object.
3.3.5 Resolution Tool
Images with better resolution are preferable to images with poorer resolution,
since they contain more image details. Resolution can be quantiﬁed in terms of
the ability of a system to image details of a given test pattern. For example,
one common way to measure resolution for a particular system is to image the
so-called resolution toolor bar phantom, such as the one depicted in Figure 3.9.
This tool is composed of groups of parallel lines of a certain width, separated by
gaps having the same width as the line width (yielding an overall duty cycle of
50 percent). Each group is characterized by the density of such lines, measured
in line pairs per millimeter (lp/mm). The tool is imaged through the system
under consideration, and system resolution is reported as the frequency (in
lp/mm) of the ﬁnest line group that can be resolved at the output. For example,
the resolution might be 6–8 lp/mm for a projection radiography system and
2 lp/mm for a CT scanner.
3.3.6 Temporal and Spectral Resolution
The preceding discussion on spatial resolution and the concepts embodied in the
PSF, LSF, and FWHM apply equally well to temporal and spectral resolution.
Figure 3.9
A resolution tool or bar
phantom.
0.5
1.0
2.0
2.5
1.5
lp/mm