64 Chapter 3 Image Quality
Notice that the separation between two adjacent maxima (or minima) of the
sinusoidal input f (x, y)i s1 /u. The recorded imageg(x, y) is also sinusoidal, with
1/u being the separation between two adjacent maxima (or minima) as well.
However, the amplitude of the output image equals the amplitude of the input
multiplied by the MTF at spatial frequencyu. In practice, MTF(u) ̸= 0, for every
u ≤ uc, and MTF(u) = 0, for every u > uc, for some spatial cutoff frequency uc,
in which case, g(x, y) = 0, for every u > uc. In this case, the resolution of the
system will be 1/uc.
EXAMPLE 3.3
The MTF depicted in Figure 3.3 becomes zero at spatial frequencies larger than 0.8m m−1.
Question What is the resolution of this system?
Answer The resolution of a system with such an MTF is 1 /(0.8m m−1) = 1.25 mm.
Fine structures of an object to be imaged by such a system with spatial frequencies larger
than 0.8m m−1 cannot be seen at the output of the system.
From our discussion, we ﬁnd that the MTF can be effectively used to
compare two competing medical imaging systems in terms of their contrast and
resolution. If the MTFs of the two systems under consideration are of a similar
shape but have a different cutoff frequency u
c, we can conclude that the system
with higher MTF values will be better in terms of contrast and resolution.
For example, the radiographic imaging system depicted in the ﬁrst panel in
Figure 3.4 is better in terms of contrast and resolution than the system depicted
in the third panel.
If the MTF curves are of different shapes, the situation is more complicated.
Figure 3.7 depicts two MTF curves that correspond to two competing medical
imaging systems: SYSTEM 1 and SYSTEM 2. SYSTEM 1 has better low fre-
quency contrast, and is thus better for imaging coarse details, while SYSTEM 2
has a better high frequency contrast, and is thus better for imaging ﬁne details.
Since contrast, as quantiﬁed by the MTF, is a function of spatial frequency, we
can make this sort of frequency-by-frequency comparison. Spatial resolution,
as described here, is not frequency-dependent, so it becomes harder to directly
compare MTFs in the context of ‘‘better resolution.’’ As described above, the
FWHM of the PSF or LSF is the most direct metric of resolution. Further
Figure 3.7
MTF curves of two
competing medical
imaging systems.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
1.0
MTF(u)
SYSTEM 1
SYSTEM 2
mm/H110021
Spatial frequency u