9.1 Instrumentation 301
As the quest for better and better spatial resolution continues, limitations of
the current detector block approach become signiﬁcant; these include concerns
with efﬁciency, resolution, and contrast. Accordingly, cutting-edge approaches
are being developed, including the use of the very same solid state approaches
as discussed for planar scintigraphy in Section 8.2.8.
PET scanners have lead or tungsten septa between the detector rings
(although this is increasingly rare because of the routine use of 3-D mode;
see below). The purpose of the septa is to collimate the photons into a set of
2-D slices. In this mode, PET reconstruction methods reduce to 2-D reconstruc-
tion applied to each slice or cross section separately. This geometry reduces
the contribution of scattered photons between slices and is very similar to
that of SPECT. When the septa are removed, the scanner operates in 3-D
mode, and coincidence events between any crystal pair are accepted. This fully
3-D (‘‘septa-less’’) acquisition and reconstruction is a big advance; the use
of 3-D mode provides about a factor of 5–10 increase in sensitivity. This increase
in sensitivity comes with a cost—signiﬁcantly higher acquired scatter events
(scatter coincidences, in which at least one of the two annihilation photons
scatters in the patient before detection)—but accurate postacquisition software
algorithms now exist for scatter correction in 3-D PET.
The original commercial PET scanners used sodium iodide NaI(Tl) as the
detector scintillation crystal, the same material used in planar scintigraphy
and SPECT. Since 511 keV photons are harder to stop than the lower energy
photons used in planar scintigraphy and SPECT, next-generation PET systems
used bismuth germanate (BGO) instead of NaI(Tl) as the scintillation crystal.
The linear attenuation coefﬁcient of BGO at 511 keV is 0.964 cm
−1 as opposed
to 0.343 cm−1 for NaI(Tl). Therefore, BGO detectors can be about one-third
the thickness of what would be required for NaI(Tl) in order to yield the
same stopping power. For example, a typical BGO crystal is about 3 cm deep.
Each crystal is typically ‘‘cut’’ into smaller subcrystals that are on the order of
6 × 6 mm. The downside of BGO as compared with NaI(Tl) is that it is only
12–14 percent as efﬁcient in light conversion.
Both NaI(Tl) and BGO are relatively slow scintillators having scintillation
decay timesof 230 ns and 300 ns, respectively. (In this context, the scintillation
decay time is the time it takes for the scintillation light output to decay to
e
−1 of its initial value.) Faster scintillators would be advantageous because it
would permit narrower time windows to be used in ACD circuits. Narrower
time windows would in turn reject more random coincidences, which are the
detection of two photons that are deemed to be from the same annihilation
event but are actually from two different annihilations. Accordingly, current-
generation PET systems use other detector materials, including cerium-doped
lutetium oxyorthosilicate (LSO) and gadolinium oxyorthosilicate (GSO), which
are single-crystal inorganic scintillators. The decay times of LSO and GSO are
on the order of 50 ns, a very signiﬁcant improvement over NaI(Tl) and BGO.
The attenuation coefﬁcients are comparable, as well, so these crystals can be
made relatively small for good spatial resolution and still retain good stopping
power (which translates to good detection sensitivity).
Just as in planar scintigraphy, the outputs of PET detectors are analyzed
by energy discrimination circuits. An energy discrimination window, centered
on the photopeak, is usually desirable. In this way, photons that have been