8.3 Image Formation 271
where Ah is the area of the collimator hole. The geometry in Figure 8.9, where
the camera itself contains the laboratory origin, is used to establish the limits of
integration of the integrals.
Equation (8.7) speciﬁes the photon ﬂuence rate at any position on the
detector (given the stated assumptions); therefore, the expected number of
counts in a planar scintigraphy image pixel can now be determined. First, the
photon ﬂuence can be computed by multiplying the photon ﬂuence rateφ by the
image acquisition time T. Second, the (mean) number of photons hitting a given
pixel on the camera face is the integral of the photon ﬂuence over the region
deﬁning the pixel. Making the assumption that the photon ﬂuence is constant
within the pixel means that we get the photon count by simply multiplying the
photon ﬂuence by the area of the pixel. Putting these facts together yields the
mean photon count in pixel k as
nk = ϵTAkφ(xk, yk) (8.8)
= ϵTAkAh
∫ 0
−∞
f (xk, yk, z)
4πz2 exp
{
−
∫ 0
z
μ(xk, yk, z′;E) dz′
}
dz , (8.9)
where ( xk, yk) and Ak are the position and area of pixel k, respectively. A
detector efﬁciency factor ϵ has been introduced to account for losses of expected
counts due to many factors such as collimator and scintillator losses.
We see from (8.9) that the pixel counts in a planar scintigraphy image
are acquired by a type of projection of the underlying activity concentration.
This is analogous to projection radiography—for example, (5.3)—but there
are important differences. On the one hand, this equation is simpler because
there is (typically) only one energy to consider; therefore, there is no integral
over an energy spectrum as there is in radiography and CT. On the other
hand, (8.9) is not a simple line integral of f (x, y, z) since there are two sources
of depth-dependent signal loss, one arising from the inverse square law and
the other from object-dependent attenuation between the radiation source
and the detector. Because of these effects, we can expect that radioactivity close
to the camera will contribute more counts than an equivalent radioactivity that
is farther away from the camera. This means that images from one side of the
body will generally be very different than images acquired from the opposite
side—that is, they will not just be mirror images. This is especially true for low-
energy radiotracers since the body’s attenuation is larger. Like the reading of
x-ray ﬁlms, where magniﬁcation distorts sizes of objects that are near versus far,
we can get accustomed to reading planar images in nuclear medicine, knowing
about object-dependent attenuation and the anatomy of the body. It will turn
out this object-dependent attenuation causes problems for SPECT, and we will
require a simpler imaging model for computational tractability, in analogy to
the effective energy model employed in CT.
Planar Sources We saw above that the image formed on an Anger camera is a
projection of the radioactivity within the body with depth-dependent effects. As
in projection radiography, it is useful to consider a planar source in order to see
what the image would be like without depth-dependent effects. This concept is