9.2 Image Formation 315
superposition to the measurements, yielding the discrete observation equation
gi =
m∑
j=1
aijfj . (9.29)
The general solution is easier to see if we represent each collection of val-
ues as vectors. Accordingly, we set g = (g1, ... , gn) and f = (f1, ... , fm) and
ai = (ai1, ... , aim). Then
gi = ai · f , (9.30)
where · denotes inner product, and
g = Af , (9.31)
where A = [aij] is a matrix that concisely describes how to transform all the image
pixel values into all the measurements. We note that (9.30) is a mathematical
representation of the forward projection process mentioned above.
Given this notation and conceptual setup, we observe that there is a
straightforward solution if the matrix A is invertible, that is,
f = A−1g . (9.32)
However, the number of measurements is generally larger than the number of
unknowns and A cannot be assumed to be square. Given more measurements
than unknowns, however, an estimate ˆf of the object can be found by the least
squares approach in linear algebra, and can be written as
ˆf = (AT A)−1AT g , (9.33)
where the T superscript denotes matrix transpose. This approach is known
as the pseudoinverse estimate of f, and the equation is known as the normal
equation. It is a practical solution only on very small problems; otherwise, there
is a signiﬁcant burden in computing the required matrix inverse. Here is where
the iterative solution comes in handy.
The Kaczmarz method solves (9.31) using the following iteration
ˆf
(k)
= ˆf
(k−1)
− (ai · ˆf
(k−1)
− gi)
ai · ai
ai , (9.34)
which is carried out for each observationgi and then repeated until convergence.1
This iteration uses one measurement at a time to updateˆf and does not require a
matrix inverse; hence, it is computationally tractable. Notice that the quantity in
the parenthesis in (9.34) includes an implementation of the forward projection
process (the inner product) applied to the current image estimate, which is
1Convergence in iterative reconstruction is the state that is attained when further iterations do not
materially improve the reconstructed image.