256 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
Figure 8.1
Components of an Anger
scintillation camera.
Computer
Gating circuit
Pulse height
analyzer
ZYX
Position logic circuit
Photomultiplier tubes
Scintillation crystal
Collimator
As described in the Overview to Part III, nuclear medicine images are based
on the distribution of radioactivity. Unlike projection radiography and CT, we
are thus interested not in total intensity but in the detected decay rate of the
source, typically expressed ascounts per time. Nuclear medicine images are thus
formed event-by-event.
The Anger scintillation camera,o r gamma camera, was invented in the late
1950s by Hal Anger of the Donner Laboratory at the University of California,
Berkeley. It is the most commonly used imaging instrument in nuclear medicine
today. The complete camera system consists of a multihole lead collimator, a 10-
to 25-inch circular, square, or rectangular sodium iodide scintillation crystal,
an array of photomultiplier tubes on the crystal, a positioning logic network, a
pulse height analyzer, a gating circuit, and a computer, as shown in Figure 8.1.
We now describe each of these components in detail.
8.2.1 Collimators
The collimator is a 1- to 2-inch thick slab of lead of the same dimensions as
that of the scintillation crystal, with a geometric array of holes in it. The lead
that separates each hole is called a septum; collectively the lead represent septa.
The collimator provides an interface between the patient and the scintillation
crystal by allowing only those photons traveling in an appropriate direction
(i.e., those that can pass through the holes without being absorbed in the lead)
to interact with the crystal. Thus, the collimator discriminates against photons
based on their direction of travel, and restricts the ﬁeld of view of the crystal. In
this regard, the collimator is not like a lens (although some authors draw that
comparison) because it does not steer or focus the photons the way a lens does.
There are several types of collimators used with Anger cameras: parallel-
hole, converging, diverging, and pinhole (Figure 8.2). The most commonly used
collimator is the parallel-hole collimator, which consists of an array of parallel
holes perpendicular to the crystal face, as shown in Figure 8.2(a). With parallel-
hole collimators, the image on the crystal face is the same size as the object. Such
collimators are either cast or fabricated from corrugated lead sheets. Originally,