8.2 Instrumentation 263
detectors have imperfect energy resolution, it is not desirable to use an extremely
narrow window, because desirable events (i.e., true photopeak events) would
be excluded. Because the window has a ﬁnite width, some scattered photons
may still be accepted (those which scatter through a small angle, and thus
retain most of their energy). For example, 140-keV photons can scatter by as
much as 50
◦ and still be accepted by the often-used 20 percent window (i.e.,
a window of ±10 percent around the photopeak energy). In practice, proper
window setting is vital, as a window that is not centered around the photopeak
(an offset window) can degrade ﬁeld uniformity of response for many cameras;
this is typically a result of the slightly better light collection efﬁciency directly
under each photomultiplier tube.
Current cameras, with microprocessor-based correction circuitry (which
will be described later), generally maintain good uniformity even with offset
pulse height windows. Such cameras may be purposely peaked to the high
side of the photopeak to further reduce scatter, by eliminating any Compton-
scattered photons that show up in the lower half of the photopeak (due to every
camera’s less than perfect energy resolution). Some cameras have two or three
separate pulse height windows to simultaneously image the multiple emissions
of some radionuclides (e.g., those from gallium-67). In this way, counts are
acquired in a shorter amount of time as the multiple energy emissions are
utilized.
8.2.7 Image Capture
Together, the positioning logic and pulse height analyzer (with its gating circuit)
yield an estimated position (X, Y) of each scintillation event that falls within the
energy discrimination window. Earlier Anger cameras were analog and relied on
photographic image formation. In these systems, theX- and Y-pulses associated
with each Z-pulse that passed through the pulse height analyzer were used to
position a ﬁnely focused dot of light on a cathode ray tube face. A collection of
these light dots over time would produce an image. Since it took a period of time
for a complete picture to be obtained, perhaps up to several minutes to obtain
several hundred thousand counts, an integrating medium was used to record the
image. The most frequently used media were various types of photographic ﬁlm.
A photographic camera was mounted on a cathode ray tube, and the shutter
was left open during the entire image acquisition period. The ﬁlm was developed
and an image of the distribution of radioactivity was obtained.
It is standard today for an Anger camera to be interfaced to a computer.
During the transition period from analog image capture, as described above,
to digital capture via computer, the ( X, Y, Z) signals were digitized (typically
with 16-bit quantization) and used by software to create images. In today’s
cameras (see Figure 8.1), the output of each PMT is digitized by its own analog-
to-digital converter, and the positioning logic and image formation described
below are implemented in a fully digital fashion. As a result, the computer and
its software become an integral and necessary part of the planar scintigraphy
image formation process, as they do in computed tomography. We describe the
computer-assisted image formation process in Section 8.3.