138 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Figure 5.5
X-ray spectra leaving the
tube, the ﬁlter, and the
body.
Leaving
filter
X-ray Photon energy, keV
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Relative x-ray intensity
20 40 60 80 100 120
Leaving
tube
Leaving
body
Besides x-rays, heat is also produced at the anode by the bombardment of
electrons. In fact, only about 1 percent of the energy deposited by the electron
beam is turned into x-rays; the remaining 99 percent turns into heat. So, at
the same time the ﬁlament current is applied, the anode is set into rotation
by applying alternating current to the stator electromagnets located outside
the tube’s glass housing. The rotors of this induction motor are connected to
the anode inside the glass housing and arranged around bearings so that the
anode can rotate freely. Anode rotation is necessary for nearly all diagnostic
radiography equipment in order to avoid melting the anode target area because
of high-energy transfer from the accelerated electrons to the target. In most
x-ray tubes, the anode rotates at 3,200–3,600 revolutions per minute (rpm),
but higher rpm tubes are also available for even better heat dissipation.
In order to maintain a constant tube current (mA) while the tube voltage
(kVp) is being applied, the ﬁlament circuit is very carefully controlled to keep
a consistent electron cloud around the ﬁlament (i.e., a consistent amount of
thermionic emission). The overall exposure is then determined by the duration
of the applied kVp, which is controlled by either a ﬁxed timer circuit or an
automatic exposure control (AEC) timer. A ﬁxed timer is generally a silicon-
controlled rectiﬁer (SCR) switch timed by a microprocessor. Timing accuracy
for these circuits is approximately 0.001 seconds. AEC timers have 5-mm-thick
parallel-plate ionization chambers placed between the patient table and the ﬁlm-
screen cassette (see Figure 5.2). An ionization chamber is a radiation detector
that generates a current when air molecules are ionized by x-rays passing through
the chamber and the free electrons and ions are attracted to anode and cathode
plates, respectively, which are held at a constant voltage. The voltage achieved
across the plates is used to trigger the SCR, which shuts off the tube voltage and
terminates the exposure.
The product of the tube current and the exposure time yields the milliampere-
second (mAs) value for the exposure. When a ﬁxed timer is used, the radiologist
controls both the mA and the exposure time directly and thereby determines
the mAs for the exposure. In AEC timers, the mAs is set by the radiologist
and the exposure time is determined automatically by the AEC circuitry. A
maximum time is set to prevent accidental overdose in the event the AEC circuit
malfunctions or the ionization chamber is missing or incorrectly positioned.