Signals and Systems
CHAPTER
22
2.1 Introduction
Signals and systems are two fundamental concepts for modeling medical imag-
ing systems. Signals are mathematical functions of one or more independent
variables, capable of modeling a variety of physical processes. Systems respond
to signals by producing new signals. They are useful for modeling how physical
processes (signals) change in natural environments and how devices, such as
medical imaging instruments, create new signals (i.e., images). This chapter
provides an introduction to the theory of signals and systems, with a focus on
those tools required for modeling medical imaging systems.
Signals can be classiﬁed into three categories: (1) continuous, (2) discrete,
and (3) mixed. A continuous signal is a function of independent variables that
range over a continuum of values. For example, in computed tomography (CT),
the distribution of x-ray attenuation in a cross-section within the body can be
mathematically modeled using a function f (x, y) of two independent real-valued
variables x and y, which represent two spatial dimensions. Physical processes
are usually modeled using continuous signals. Some medical images, such as
those obtained on x-ray ﬁlm, are also modeled as continuous signals.
A discrete signal is a function of independent variables that range over
discrete values. These signals can be used to model physical processes that
naturally correspond to discrete values. For example, the times of arrival of
photons in a radioactive decay process form a discrete sequence of arrival
times—that is, an intrinsically discrete signal. Discrete signals can also be used
to represent continuous signals. For example, the x-ray distribution f (x, y)
described above might be represented in a computer as a function f
d(m, n)o f
two independent discrete variables m and n.
Finally, a mixed signal is a function of some continuous and some discrete
independent variables. Signals of this type are acquired by certain medical
imaging instruments. For example, in CT, a signal g(ℓ, θk), k = 1, 2,... ,i s
recorded as a result of a parallel or fan beam of x-rays passing through an
object. Variable ℓ is often modeled as continuous-valued, representing the
15