9.3 Image Quality in SPECT and PET 317
It can be shown that the following ML-EM iteration
f (k+1)
j =
f (k)
j
aj
n∑
i=1
aji
ni
ni(f(k))
(9.37)
converges to the ML solution. Here, f(k) is the k-th estimate of the image, and
aj =
n∑
i=1
aij , j = 1, ... , m (9.38)
are the sensitivity factors that characterize the sensitivity of each voxel to the
collection of measurements. (If aj = 0f o rs o m ej, then the geometry of the
system cannot estimate fj, and this pixel should be excluded from the model.)
The ML-EM algorithm (9.37) makes use of the forward model through ni(f(k)),
although the comparison with the observations is done using a ratio rather than
a difference. We see that if ni = ni(f(k)) for all i, then the image estimate remains
unchanged because of the deﬁnition of the sensitivity factors in (9.38).
In the past, ML-EM approaches suffered from lengthy reconstruction times
and difﬁculty in converging to a useful solution, particularly in the presence
of signiﬁcant noise. (Difﬁculties in convergence lead to increased numbers of
iterations, increasing overall reconstruction time.) Hudson and Larkin made
a major breakthrough when they developed an algorithm— ordered subsets
expectation maximization (OSEM)—that utilizes ‘‘ordered subsets’’ to acceler-
ate iterative reconstruction. In this approach, observations are grouped into an
ordered sequence of subsets or blocks. For example, if a full set of projections
consists of 360 views and there are 15 subsets, each subset would consist of
24 views. Of major importance, these subsets represent mutually exclusive and
collectively exhaustive use of the projection data, and they are treated indepen-
dently in parallel. One iteration of the algorithm is a single pass through all the
subsets. However, the reconstructed image is updated after every subset, which
accelerates convergence.
Ordered subsets are an extension of iterative reconstruction. In Hudson
and Larkin’s original implementation, they used Shepp and Vardi’s expectation
maximization approach. Like any standard EM algorithm, this consists of
a backprojection–projection–backprojection sequence. At each iteration, the
reconstruction from the previous iteration is the starting point. In OSEM, the
standard EM algorithm is applied to each of the subsets in turn. Such an
approach can be applied to both SPECT and PET imaging. In SPECT, the
subsets may correspond to natural groupings of projections—for example, each
head in a triple-head system. In PET, projection data may be reorganized after
acquisition to deﬁne blocks or subsets in a similar fashion. OSEM has become
the preferred approach to reconstruction in emission tomography (including
both SPECT and PET).
9.3 Image Quality in SPECT and PET
From a physics point of view, there are ﬁve major factors that affect image
quality and the quantiﬁcation of absolute radioactivity in emission tomography.
These include ﬁnite spatial resolution (e.g., the in-plane and axial spatial