3.3 Resolution 61
If we add a constant intensity Ic to the image, the intensities of the background and the
target become fb = Io + Ic, and ft = It + Ic. The local contrast of the processed image is
C′ = (It + Ic) − (Io + Ic)
Io + Ic
= It − Io
Io + Ic
= C Io
Io + Ic
< C.
So, the local contrast is worse if we add a constant intensity Ic to the image.
3.3 Resolution
Resolution is another basic measure of image quality. For our purposes, resolu-
tion can be thought of as the ability of a medical imaging system to accurately
depict two distinct events in space, time, or frequency as separate. In this case,
we talk about spatial, temporal,o r spectral resolution, respectively. Resolution
can also be thought of as the degree of smearing, or blurring, a medical imaging
system introduces to a single event in space, time, or frequency. These two
ways of looking at resolution are related, because the less smearing a system
introduces, the closer in space, time, or frequency two events can be and still be
distinguished as separate. Therefore, a high resolution medical imaging system
is characterized by low smearing, whereas a low resolution system is character-
ized by high smearing. In this section, we mostly focus on spatial resolution,
although a brief discussion of temporal and spectral resolution is also provided.
Therefore, when we talk about ‘‘resolution,’’ we mean spatial resolution, unless
otherwise speciﬁed.
3.3.1 Line Spread Function
As suggested above, we can think of resolution as the degree of smearing, or
blurring, a medical imaging system introduces to a single event (e.g., a point)
in space. This is the traditional PSF described in Chapter 2, and the response
of an imaging system to a point source (i.e., a point impulse) is often used to
characterize resolution. As an alternative, we can consider the response of a
medical imaging system to a line impulse (see Section 2.2.2).
Consider an LSI medical imaging system with isotropic PSF h(x, y) that is
normalized to 1. Suppose that a line source, passing through the origin of the
spatial domain, is imaged through the system. We will mathematically represent
this line source by theline impulse f(x, y) = δ
ℓ(x, y) [see (2.11)]. Since the system
is isotropic, it is sufﬁcient to consider the response to a vertical line through the
origin; from (2.11), we see that for this case, f (x, y) = δ(x). Then, the output
g(x, y) of the system will be given by
g(x, y) =
∫
∞
−∞
∫ ∞
−∞
h(ξ, η)f (x − ξ, y − η) dξ dη
=
∫ ∞
−∞
[∫ ∞
−∞
h(ξ, η)δ(x − ξ) dξ
]
dη
=
∫ ∞
−∞
h(x, η) dη , (3.13)
where, in the third equality, we have used the 1-D analog of (2.6).