154 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
5.2.8 Mammography
Mammography is a sufﬁciently specialized and widely used modality within
projection radiography that we consider it separately here. Mammography is
used for the early detection of breast cancer either by direct detection of tumors
in the images or by detection of microcalciﬁcations (tiny deposits of calcium) that
sometimes indicate the presence of breast cancer. A conventional mammography
unit is based on a traditional projection radiography system, whose size is
optimized for the breast. Low-energy x-rays (around 30 kVp) are typically
used. A signiﬁcant feature of such systems is the integration of compression
via a paddle to produce a reduced and more uniform (and somewhat more
standardized across patients) thickness organ for imaging. In this approach,
the breast is compressed between the paddle and the detector; compression
thus also reduces motion during imaging. Another important feature of most
conventional mammography systems is an automated intensity control system
that optimizes detector exposure.
With the advent of full ﬁeld digital mammography , more than half of
all mammography systems are now direct digital radiography systems. Early
digital systems had 70 micron pixels, leading to spatial resolution around
3.5 line pairs/mm (compared with 12 or so line pairs/mm to as much as 20 line
pairs/mm for ﬁlm-screen-based systems); current systems have resolution around
6–8 line pairs/mm. However, digital systems have much greater dynamic range
than ﬁlm, avoiding problems of under- or over-exposure. The digital display
of images provides control over brightness and contrast. Furthermore, digital
systems have advanced processing algorithms for contrast enhancement and
small-structure enhancement, as well as computed-aided detection and diagnosis
(CAD) algorithms that help the radiologist to interpret the images.
The most advanced mammography systems use tomosynthesis or stereo
digital mammography. In the latter, two mammograms shifted by 5–10 degrees
are captured and digitally fused and displayed. In the former, multiple (typically,
7–12) angular views are captured over a 50-degree arc, and then digitally
reconstructed to yield a volumetric dataset, from which individual tomographic
slices can be extracted and displayed. Most tomosynthesis systems are based
on the concept of linear tomography and are only implemented in state-of-
the-art full-ﬁeld digital mammography systems. Now that the technology is
becoming more widely accepted, more mammography systems can be equipped
for tomosynthesis, and some have iterative reconstruction methods that permit
dose reduction and improved visualization of microcalciﬁcations.
5.3 Image Formation
5.3.1 Basic Imaging Equation
The x-ray tube emits a burst of x-rays that, after ﬁltration and restriction, are
incident upon the patient. These x-rays are then attenuated as they pass through
the body in a spatial pattern that depends on the linear attenuation coefﬁcient
distribution in the body. Consider a particular line segment through the object
starting at the x-ray origin and ending on the detector plane at point ( x, y), as
shown in Figure 5.13. The linear attenuation is a function of x, y, and z,i n
general; on the line, it can be considered to be a function of its distance s from