282 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
If we are to keep the image acquisition duration to a feasible value, we must
increase count rate in order to increase total counts. This situation is analogous
to that in projection radiography, and some of the solutions are apparently the
same—for example, improve detector efﬁciency or increase dose. But there are
some practical considerations that must be addressed in planar scintigraphy that
are largely missing in projection radiography. We know, for example, that it is
straightforward to improve collimator efﬁciency, but it is at the expense of spatial
resolution. So, for a given desired resolution, perhaps geared toward a particular
clinical goal, we cannot improve collimator efﬁciency beyond a certain value.
We also know that we could improve detector efﬁciency in order to increase
the number of detected photons. If that efﬁciency is improved by changes to
the detector material, providing higher gamma ray stopping power with the
same geometry, then that is good. A great deal of research has gone into this
endeavor, leading to very efﬁcient detector materials today, and it is not clear
how much farther this can be taken. The obvious solution is to increase the
detector’s thickness, but we know that this will degrade resolution.
As in projection radiography, we can increase the dose, in this case by inject-
ing a larger amount of the radiotracer (i.e., more radioactivity) into the patient.
Aside from the obvious, undesirable properties associated with increasing the
dose of ionizing radiation to the patient, planar scintigraphy (unlike projection
radiography) has a problem handling the larger numbers of photons per unit
time with increasing activity incident upon the camera. In particular, after the
deposition of energy in the detector, it takes a certain amount of time for the
scintillation photons to be given off, and for the electronics to register a ‘‘count.’’
During this time, called the dead time or resolving time τ of the Anger camera,
the detector is only partially responsive to the deposition of additional energy.
The inverse of the resolving time is the maximum counting rate of the camera:
Maximum counting rate = 1
τ . (8.30)
In clinical situations, resolving times are typically between 10 and 15μs, and this
leads to maximum counting rates of between 60K and 100K counts per second.
Furthermore, Anger cameras are paralyzable, which means that the observed
count rate does not simply plateau at 1
τ , but actually begins to progressively
decrease (the camera ‘‘loses counts’’), as the radioactivity increases.
Furthermore, exceeding the maximum counting rate may causepulse pileup,
a situation that occurs when two or more photons are absorbed in the crystal
too close together to be counted as separate events. The photons may be treated
as a single event whose energy is the sum of the energies deposited by the two (or
more) photons; in this case, both (or more) are rejected due to energy window
considerations. Alternatively, only the second may be rejected, due to the time
required to count the ﬁrst. Either case represents a loss of counts and an excess,
unnecessary dose to the patient.
8.5 Summary and Key Concepts
Nuclear medicine produces images of function (body physiology and biochem-
istry). Planar scintigraphy is the nuclear medicine technique that produces 2-D