Further Reading 223
6.5 Summary and Key Points
Computed tomography solves the problem of loss of contrast present in pro-
jection radiography that is caused by superposition of overlying structures, by
focusing directly (and exclusively) on the cross-sectional image slice of interest.
This strategy signiﬁcantly improves contrast, at the expense of spatial resolu-
tion, but the gain in contrast is so important that CT is ubiquitous in medical
imaging practice. In this chapter, we presented the following key concepts that
you should now understand:
1. A tomogram is an image of a cross-sectional plane or slice within or through
the body.
2. X-ray computed tomography(CT) produces tomograms of the distribution
of linear attenuation coefﬁcients, expressed in Hounsﬁeld units.
3. There are currently seven generations of CT scanner design, which depend
on the relation between the x-ray source and detectors, and the extent and
motion of the detectors (and patient table).
4. The basic imaging equationis identical to that for projection radiography;
the difference is that the ensemble of projections is used to reconstruct
cross-sectional images.
5. The most common reconstruction algorithm isﬁltered backprojection, which
arises from the projection-slice theorem.
6. In practice, the reconstruction algorithm must consider the geometry of the
scanner—parallel-beam, fan-beam, helical-scan, or cone-beam.
7. As in projection radiography, noise limits an image’s SNR.
8. Other artifacts include aliasing, beam hardening, and—as in projection
radiography— inclusion of Compton scattered photons.
Further Reading
Carlton, R.R. and Adler, A.M. Principles of Radio-
graphic Imaging: An Art and a Science, 5th ed.
Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning,
2012.
Kak, A.C. and Slaney, M. Principles of Comput-
erized Tomographic Imaging. New York, NY:
IEEE Press, 1988.
Kalender, W.A. Computed Tomography, 3rd ed.
Munich: Publicis MCD Verlag, 2011.
Hsieh, J. Computed Tomography: Principles,
Design, Artifacts, and Recent Advances . 2nd
ed. Bellingham, WA: SPIE Press, 2009.
Macovski, A. ‘‘Physical Problems of Computerized
Tomography.’’ Proceedings of the IEEE 71,
1983: 373–78.
Macovski, A. Medical Imaging Systems. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1983.
Mahesh, M. MDCT Physics: The Basics, Philadel-
phia, PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
2009.
Wolbarst, A.B. Physics of Radiology, 2nd ed. Nor-
walk, CT: Appleton and Lange, 2005.
Zeng, G. Medical Image Reconstruction: A Concep-
tual Tutorial, Heidelberg: Springer, 2010.