92 Chapter 3 Image Quality
3.9 Summary and Key Concepts
Image quality characterizes the performance of a medical imaging system and
directly affects clinical utility. It is assessed through a combination of speciﬁc
performance parameters as measured in images. In this chapter, we presented
the following key concepts that you should now understand:
1. Image qualityrefers to the degree to which an image allows a radiologist to
accomplish the clinical goals of the imaging study.
2. The six most important factors inﬂuencing image quality are contrast,
resolution, noise, artifacts, distortion, and accuracy.
3. Contrast refers to the difference in image intensity of an object or target and
surrounding objects or background.
4. Resolution is the ability of an imaging system to distinguish and depict two
signals that differ in space, time, or energy as distinct.
5. Noise is any random ﬂuctuation in an image; noise generally interferes with
the ability to detect a signal in an image.
6. Continuous signals are transformed by sampling or discretization into
discrete signals in order to be digitally represented.
7. Aliasing is caused by improper sampling of a continuous signal, yielding
artifacts in the resulting digital image.
8. Artifacts are false signals in an image that do not represent any valid
structural or functional signal in the patient.
9. Distortion is any geometric inaccuracy in size or shape.
10. Quantitative accuracy refers to the accuracy, compared with the truth, of
numerical values obtained from an image; diagnostic accuracy refers to the
accuracy of interpretations and conclusions about the presence or absence
of disease drawn from image patterns.
Further Reading
Barrett, H.H. and Swindell, W. Radiological Imag-
ing: The Theory of Image Formation, Detection,
and Processing . New York, NY: Academic
Press, 1981.
Carlton, R.R. and Adler, A.M. Principles of Radio-
graphic Imaging: An Art and a Science, 5th ed.
Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning,
2012.
Cherry, S.R., Sorenson, J.A., and Phelps, M.E.
Physics in Nuclear Medicine, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, PA: W. B. Saunders, 2012.
Cunningham, I.A. ‘‘Applied Linear Systems The-
ory.’’ pp. 79–159 in Handbook of Medical
Imaging. Vol. 1, Physics and Psychophysics .
Bellingham, WA: SPIE Press, 2000.
Dobbins, J.T. ‘‘Image Quality Metrics for Digi-
tal Systems.’’ pp. 161–222 in Handbook of
Medical Imaging. Vol. 1, Physics and Psy-
chophysics. Bellingham, WA: SPIE Press, 2000.
Evans, A.L. The Evaluation of Medical Images .
Bristol, England: Adam Hilger, 1981.
Krestel, E. Imaging Systems for Medical Diag-
nostics. Berlin, Germany: Siemens Aktienge-
sellschaft, 1990.
Papoulis, A. and Pillai, S.U. Probability, Random
Variables and Stochastic Processes , 4th ed.
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2002.