302 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
detected after Compton scattering in the patient are rejected, and multiple
simultaneous detection of photons is also rejected. Sometimes, it is desirable
to lower the discrimination window to include part of the Compton plateau.
The reason for this is that it is common for there to be a Compton interaction
within the detector, depositing a fairly large amount of energy, but allowing the
photon to ultimately escape the detector without being fully absorbed. In this
case, the primary Compton event is actually the correct event to detect as
it represents the proper location of one of the two 511 keV photons created
during positron annihilation. Setting the lower window threshold is therefore
a matter of trading off the acceptance of two types of Compton events—those
that occur in the patient, which we do not want to count and those that occur
in the crystal, which we do want to count. A common lower energy threshold
is 300–350 keV.
Time-of-Flight PET For most of the discussion in this chapter, thedifference in
arrival times (at the detectors) of the two 511 keV annihilation photons is not
considered, as long as both arrivals are within the coincidence time window.
However, it is important to note that the two photons only arrive at exactly
the same time at two opposing detectors if the annihilation event is exactly
halfway between the two detectors. Any offset will be reﬂected by one of the
photons arriving sooner at its detector than the other at its detector. This
difference in arrival times could be used to position the annihilation eventalong
the coincidence line, potentially yielding better spatial resolution and/or higher
signal-to-noise in the reconstructed image.
Bearing in mind that the two annihilation photons are traveling at the speed
of light, very high temporal resolution is required to take advantage of this
so-called time-of-ﬂight (TOF) information in PET. In TOF-PET, the difference
in arrival times is recorded and used in the reconstruction process. This arrival
time difference increases as the annihilation event is farther from the midpoint
of the coincidence line. Of importance, in order to have TOF information
exactly locate the event, thus eliminating the need for reconstruction per se, the
scanner’s temporal resolution would have to be on the order of 25 picoseconds.
Unfortunately, modern scanners have temporal resolution of a few hundred
picoseconds (equivalent to spatial resolution of a few centimeters if we only
use TOF information to position the annihilation event), so some sort of
reconstruction is still required. However, the TOF information can be used to
constrain the reconstruction algorithm.
The approximate improvement in SNR over that obtained with non-TOF
PET is:
SNR
TOF =
√
2D
c/Delta1t SNRnon-TOF , (9.1)
where D is the diameter of the object being imaged,c is the speed of light, and/Delta1t
is the temporal resolution of the scanner. All else being equal, the improvement
in SNR is greatest for larger-sized objects (e.g., the human body as opposed to
the brain) since larger-sized objects lead to greater differences in arrival times.
In order to improve /Delta1t, very new detectors with a short scintillation decay time,
such as lanthanum bromide (LaBr3), are used.