Emission Computed
Tomography
CHAPTER
99
Planar scintigraphy is the only direct imaging approach in nuclear medicine
(i.e., an image exists directly at the end of frame mode acquisition). The other
two imaging methods in nuclear medicine—single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET)—require com-
puted tomography image reconstruction methods. Like computed tomography
(CT), these modalities require the acquisition of projection data, which are then
reconstructed into transverse (or transaxial) slice images. SPECT systems can be
designed around a customized array of detectors but are usually based on one
or more high-quality Anger cameras, which rotate around the body to acquire
a series of projection images with different angular orientations. Multiple cross
sections of the body can be reconstructed—in parallel, in principle—from these
data. It is reasonable to say that SPECT is to planar scintigraphy as multiple-row
detector CT is to projection radiography.
PET is in a class of its own, however, having no suitable analogy in other
imaging modalities. PET measures the location of the line on which a positron is
annihilated, an event that produces two simultaneous 511 keV gamma photons
(or annihilation photons). After accumulating many such coincidence lines, line
integrals of activity are produced and computed tomography reconstruction
methods are directly applied.
PET is unique in both its physics and chemistry. The most commonly used
PET radionuclides, carbon-11, nitrogen-13, oxygen-15, and ﬂuorine-18, are
isotopes of elements that occur naturally in organic molecules. (Fluorine usually
does not, but it is a bioisosteric substitute for hydrogen.) Thus, radiopharmaceu-
tical synthesis is simpliﬁed, and the tracer principle (which mandates as small a
change in the molecule to be traced as possible) is better satisﬁed. Indeed, useful
PET radiopharmaceuticals are now available to measure in vivosuch important
physiologic and biochemical processes as blood ﬂow, oxygen, glucose, and
free fatty acid metabolism, amino acid transport, and neuroreceptor density.
The short half-lives of the radionuclides (e.g., carbon-11, 20 minutes; nitrogen-
13, 10 minutes; oxygen-15, 2 minutes; ﬂuorine-18, 110 minutes) permit the
293