318 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
resolution of a SPECT or PET scanner); attenuation of photons by tissue;
detection of scattered photons; accidental coincidence counting of random
(unpaired) photons in coincidence, applicable only to PET imaging; and ‘‘noise’’
resulting from the statistical nature of radioactive decay.
9.3.1 Spatial Resolution
As ﬁrst introduced in Chapter 3, all imaging systems have a limited ability
to resolve small objects. The spatial resolution of an emission tomography
system can be thought of as that distance by which two small point sources
of radioactivity must be separated to be distinguished as separate in the image
(see again Figure 3.6). The spatial resolution of a SPECT system is mainly
determined by the resolution in the projection data, which itself is determined by
the factors discussed in Section 8.4.1, and the effects of reconstruction, especially
the speciﬁc ﬁlter used, since the approximate ramp ﬁlter given in (9.11) usually
includes a low-pass ﬁlter W(ϱ ) to reduce noise. The spatial resolution of a PET
system is mainly determined by the physical cross-section dimensions of each
detector element and the effects of reconstruction. In addition, because PET
uses the annihilation site, rather than the emission site of the positron per se,
positron range (i.e., the distance the positron travels before annihilation) also
limits resolution. In particular, positron range depends on the initial energy
of the positron. Positrons are emitted with a range of energies, leading to a
distribution of positron ranges. The effective spatial resolution of a PET scanner
can be modeled as the convolution of the scanner’s intrinsic point spread
function (PSF) with the positron range distribution.
In practice, we can model SPECT and PET resolution as a cascade of LSI
systems [see (2.46)]. The development is identical to that for CT resolution, as
fully derived in Section 6.4.1. The ﬁnal expression for the relation between the
reconstructed (but blurred) image and the object, identical to (6.56), is
ˆf (x, y) = f (x, y) ∗ h(r) , (9.39)
where r =
√
x2 + y2.
Here (as in CT), h( r) represents the (cascaded) PSF and h( r) for SPECT
includes (1) the (1-D, in-plane) projection PSF [i.e., (8.14), with y set to 0, and
x = ℓ] and (2) w [identical to w in (6.48)]; h(r) for PET includes (1) a positron
range function, (2) a rect function for detector width [identical to s in (6.48)],
and (3) w.
Finite spatial resolution in SPECT and PET results in two important, related
effects. First, the image is blurred, with the degree of blurring dependent on
the spatial resolution. This blurring prevents the delineation of edges of larger
structures and may not allow the visualization of smaller ones as distinct
objects. Second, neighboring areas are smeared and averaged together, reducing
the measured value in the areas with greater radioactivity, and increasing it in
the areas with lesser radioactivity (i.e., reducing contrast). Said another way,
referring back to (3.1), the reduction in f
max and the increase in fmin reduces
modulation (or contrast). In this fashion, ﬁnite spatial resolution produces an
underestimation of radioactivity in small structures with greater radioactivity,
with progressive underestimation as the structures get smaller. The effect is