PART
II
Radiographic
Imaging
Overview
Ionizing radiation—radiation capable of ejecting electrons from atoms—forms
the basis of a number of important imaging modalities. In some cases, we are
interested in the transmission of ionizing radiation through the body. In other
cases, we are interested in the emission of ionizing radiation from the body.
In this part of the book, we consider the two main imaging modalities that
make use of the transmission of ionizing radiation through the body: projection
radiography and computed tomography.
Projection radiography and computed tomography rely on thetransmission
of ionizing radiation through the body. Various tissues and organs within the
body attenuate or decrease the intensity of the beam of ionizing radiation as it
passes through the body. Thus, even if the beam entering the body is of uniform
intensity, the beam exiting the body contains ‘‘shadows’’ of tissues and organs as
a ‘‘latent image’’ of varying beam intensity. Since it is the physical characteristics
of the tissues or organs (e.g., effective atomic number and density) that determine
that tissue’s attenuation abilities, the resulting images depict structures within
the body, and projection radiography and computed tomography are considered
anatomical imaging modalities, since they portray anatomy.
In Figure 1.1(b), we showed the most classic projection radiograph—a
‘‘chest x-ray.’’ In Figure II.1, we show several other transmission images.
Figure II.1(a) is also a projection radiograph—this time, of a hand. Notice
the dominance of bone in this image and the homogeneity of soft tissues. This
is because soft tissues do not attenuate x-rays as well as bone and the difference
in attenuation between different types of soft tissues is very small. Figure II.1(b)
shows a radiograph of the head and neck. Because the shoulders are wide in this
lateral (left-to-right) view and they contain bone, the attenuation there is quite
large, and the image is washed out (white) there. The brain, being all soft tissue,
is virtually devoid of features in this image. This lack of detail in the brain was of
great frustration to radiologists until computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) burst onto the scene in the 1970s and 1980s.