162 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Imaging Equation with Geometric Effects It is useful to develop an imaging
equation that incorporates the geometric effects we have presented in this
section. To do this, we utilize an idealized object t
z(x, y) that is inﬁnitesimally
thin and located in a single plane given by the coordinate z and is capable of
differentially attenuating x-rays as a function of x and y. This object can be
thought of as a sheet of paper impregnated with a distribution of lead; a pictorial
representation is given in Figure 5.13.
We should think of tz(x, y)a sa transmittivity, rather than an attenuation;
it replaces the entire exponential factor, rather than μ itself. Accordingly, if the
object is located at the detector face—so that there is no magniﬁcation—the
recorded intensity would be
Id(x, y) = I0 cos3 θ td(x, y) , (5.16)
where
cos θ = d√
d2 + x2 + y2
. (5.17)
In general, when the object is located at arbitrary z, where 0 < z ≤ d,t h e
magniﬁcation must be taken into account. This effect is just a scaling of the size
of the object, and it is
Id(x, y) = I0 cos3 θ tz(x/M(z), y/M(z)) . (5.18)
Putting (5.18) together with (5.14) and (5.17) yields
Id(x, y) = I0
(
d√
d2 + x2 + y2
)3
tz(xz/d, yz/d) . (5.19)
This equation is a reasonable approximation for relatively thin objects that have
nearly the same magniﬁcation and no variation in their attenuation in the z
direction. This equation does not take into account the effect of integration
along ray paths through thick objects (such as the human body).
5.3.3 Blurring Effects
It was shown above that divergent rays will blur edges of objects that are thick
in the range direction. There are two effects, however, that will blur objects even
if they do not have az extent: extended sources and the detector thickness—that
is, the intensifying screen in ﬁlm-based systems, the PSP phosphor in CR systems,
and the scintillator or s-Se plate in CCD, TFT, and CMOS digital radiography
systems. Both of these processes can be modeled as convolutional effects that
degrade image resolution. They are not present in (5.18) and (5.19) because in
these equations there is only magniﬁcation and intensity changes made to the
inﬁnitesimally thin object t
z(x, y). We now explore these two effects in detail.
Extended Sources Another characteristic of projection radiographs is blurri-
ness arising from the nonzero extent of the x-ray source—the spot size of the
site of x-ray emissions from the anode. As shown in Figure 5.18, this blurring