3.4 Noise 69
Temporal resolution is the ability to distinguish two events in time as being
separate. Spectral resolution is the ability to distinguish two different frequen-
cies (or, equivalently, energies). Conceptually, we could create a frequency
distribution histogram of the number of observed events as a function of time
or energy from a single-time or single-energy process (i.e., a point impulse
in time or energy) to yield the equivalent of a PSF. As with the PSF, the
ideal system response would be a delta function and the actual FWHM (in
time or energy) would quantify the resolution. In other words, the concept of
PSF applies equally well to events in time or frequency as it does to events
in space.
3.4 Noise
An unwanted characteristic of medical imaging systems is noise.N o i s ei sa
generic term that refers to any type of random ﬂuctuation in an image, and
it can have a dramatic impact on image quality; image quality decreases as
noise increases. The source and amount of noise depend on the imaging method
used and the particular medical imaging system at hand. For example, in
projection radiography, x-rays arrive at the detector in discrete packets of
energy, called quanta or photons. The discrete nature of their arrival leads
to random ﬂuctuations, called quantum mottle, which give an x-ray image a
textured or grainy appearance. On the other hand, in MRI, radio frequency
pulses generated by nuclear spin systems are sensed by antennas connected
to ampliﬁers. Since these signals have very low power, they compete with
signals being generated in the antenna from natural thermal vibrations. Thermal
vibrations are unpredictable—that is, random—and therefore comprise one
source of noise in magnetic resonance images. The effect of increasing noise is
shown in Figure 3.10.
The source of noise in a medical imaging system depends on the physics
and instrumentation of the particular modality, subjects that will be developed
in depth later in this book. The main objective of this section is to provide an
introductory exposition of the tools used to mathematically characterize noise.
A general way to characterize noise is to consider it as the numerical outcome
of a random event or experiment. In nuclear medicine, for example, certain
radioactive sources emit gamma ray photons that are received and recorded
by a detector. Although governed by ﬁxed physical properties (such as photon
energy and decay rate), the speciﬁc nature of radioactive decay is random:
photons are emitted at random times in random directions. We think of the
noise as the deviation from a nominal value that would be predicted from
Figure 3.10
The effect of noise on
image quality: image
quality decreases rapidly
with increasing noise
contamination.
Increasing Noise
