8.4 Image Quality 275
poor resolution when used for high-energy radiotracers (because photons can
penetrate the septa without being absorbed), and is generally an ill-advised prac-
tice for that reason. It should be noted that b, the effective scintillation crystal
thickness, is also energy-dependent. Higher-energy photons will penetrate the
crystal farther, on average, before being absorbed, which contributes an addi-
tional degradation of resolution (R
C becomes larger) with high-energy photons.
Intrinsic Resolution The concept of collimator resolution incorporates both
the geometry of the collimator and the energy-dependent septal penetration of
photons. Additional blurring takes place in the scintillator itself, however, and
this process is characterized by the intrinsic resolutionof the Anger camera.
The concept of intrinsic resolution is not quite the same as that of resolution
in an intensifying screen in radiography. In both projection radiography and
planar scintigraphy, there is a ﬂash of light in the scintillator (or phosphor)
when a photon is absorbed. In projection radiography, the spread of the light
is permanently recorded on the (ﬁlm or solid state) detector. The amount that
the light spreads represents the blurring of the image. In planar scintigraphy,
the spreading of the ﬂash of light is used to estimate the position of the single
absorption event. It is inaccuracy in the estimation of ( X, Y) that accounts for
imperfect intrinsic resolution in planar scintigraphy.
There are two primary reasons for inaccuracy in the estimation of (X, Y)i n
an Anger camera. The ﬁrst reason is related to the path of the absorbed photon.
As discussed in Chapter 4, a photon that is absorbed by the photoelectric
effect may have experienced some Compton scattering events prior to the ﬁnal
absorbing event. Those Compton events occurring in the scintillator generate
ﬂashes of light, smaller in intensity than the ﬁnal event but spread out in space.
These ﬂashes are detected in the array of photomultiplier tubes (as though they
came from a single event) and they contribute to the error in estimating ( X, Y)
by skewing the peak light distribution along the photon path.
The second reason for inaccuracy in the estimation of ( X, Y) is noise or
statistical ﬂuctuation. Consider a photon that goes straight through a collimator
hole and is absorbed promptly in a single photoelectric event. This is an ideal
event, devoid of geometric or Compton scattering problems and should be
localized perfectly if we lived in a perfect world. In fact, the physics and
electronics that follow are beset with inherent statistical ﬂuctuations that render
the result less than perfect. First, both the number and the spatial distribution
of scintillation light photons resulting from the photoelectric event are random.
Although detailed analysis of the physics of the scintillator can provide good
models for the mean numbers of these photons, the exact number cannot be
known perfectly. Thus, the number and spatial distribution of light entering into
any PMT are also random. The situation gets progressively worse within a PMT,
where the electron cascade process is also random. All this leads to statistical
variations in the peak pulse heights a
k, k = 1, ... , K within the photomultiplier
array. These variations lead to a statistical error variance associated with the
estimation of ( X, Y), which causes additional blurring in the localization of
radioactive sources in space.
Intrinsic resolution of an Anger camera can be characterized by another
FWHM, RI, which encompasses both sources of variation in the scintillation
process. It is common to model the PSF associated with this process by a