3.4 Noise 75
3.4.4 Independent Random Variables
It is usual in imaging experiments to consider more than one random variable
at a time. The theory that is required in order to characterize a collection of
random variables follows from the theory of a single random variable, with
parallel deﬁnitions of distribution, density, and mass functions. In this book,
however, we require only a simpliﬁed discussion related tosums of independent
random variables . Loosely speaking, a collection of random variables are
independent if knowledge of some of the random variables (i.e., making a
partial observation) tells you nothing, statistically speaking, about the remaining
random variables.
Consider the collection of random variables N
1, N2, ... Nm, having the
pdf’s p1(η), p2(η), ... , pm(η), respectively. The sum of these random variables
S is another random variable having another pdf, pS(η). It is always the case
that the mean of S is precisely the sum of the means of N1, N2, ... , Nm.
That is,
μS = μ1 + μ2 +···+ μm , (3.55)
where μ1, ... , μm are the means of the pdf’s given above. Independence is not
required for this to be true.
When the random variables are independent, we can go a step further. In
this case, the variance of S is the sum of the individual variances,
σ2
S = σ2
1 + σ2
2 +···+ σ2
m . (3.56)
We emphasize that the variances, not the standard deviations, are added. Also,
in the case of independence, it is possible to determine the pdf of S by
pS(η) = p1(η) ∗ p2(η) ∗···∗ pm(η) , (3.57)
where ∗ is convolution. The facts that the variances add and that the pdf
of the sum can be determined easily are powerful results following from
the independence of random variables. We will use these facts to derive
approximate noise and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) expressions for CT imaging
in Chapter 6.
EXAMPLE 3.9
Consider the sum S of two independent Gaussian random variables N1 and N2, each
having a mean of zero and variance of σ2.
Question What are the mean, variance, and pdf of the resulting random variable?
Answer The mean of S is zero since
μS = μ1 + μ2 = 0 + 0 = 0,
and the variance of S is 2σ2 since
σ2
S = σ2
1 + σ2
2 = σ2 + σ2 = 2σ2 .
Using the fact that the convolution of two Gaussian waveforms yields a Gaussian
waveform, we conclude that the pdf of S has a Gaussian form. Furthermore,