4.4 Nature and Properties of Ionizing Radiation 119
photoelectric or Compton event. What are the factors that make a photoelectric
effect more likely? Since a photoelectric event occurs as a result of an interaction
with the coulomb ﬁeld of the nucleus of an atom and if there are more (positively
charged) protons in the nucleus, the likelihood should increase. The probability
of a photoelectric event is related to the atom’s atomic numberZ. In a compound
composed of a variety of different atoms, we deﬁne an effective atomic number
Z
eff, which characterizes the average atomic number in a certain sense. The
probability of a photoelectric event is (approximately) proportional to Z4
eff.2
The other factor affecting the probability of a photoelectric event is the
incident photon energy. Intuitively, we might expect that high-energy photons
are more penetrating—that is, they pass farther into an object before being
absorbed. This intuition is correct; in fact, the probability of a photoelectric
event (given all else held constant) is proportional to 1 /(hν)3. Putting this
together, we ﬁnd
Prob[photoelectric event] ∝ Z4
eff
(hν)3 . (4.10)
Finally, we note that when the photon energy rises above the binding energy
of L-shell or K-shell electrons, experiments reveal that the probability of a
photoelectric interaction increases abruptly, then begins to diminish as the
energy is further increased. This sudden increase occurs because a large number
of electrons has suddenly become available to be ejected from their host atoms.
This property will be important in the use ofcontrast agentsin radiography and
computed tomography.
Now we ask another question: What are the factors that make a Compton
scattering event more likely? Since Compton events occur with very loosely
bound (or ‘‘free’’) electrons in the outer shells, what matters is the number
of electrons per kilogram of material—the electron density (ED). The electron
density is given by
ED = N
AZ
Wm
, (4.11)
where NA is Avogadro’s number (atoms/mole), Z is the atomic number (elec-
trons/atom), and Wm is the molecular weight of the atom (grams/mole). As
shown in Table 4.4, except for hydrogen, the electron density for various bio-
logical materials is nearly the same, 3 × 1026 electrons/kg (see Problem 4.7).
Therefore, the probability of Compton scattering is nearly independent of the
atomic number (actual or effective).
The other factor that might inﬂuence the probability of Compton scatter
is the photon energy. There is a fairly complicated relationship described by
the Klein-Nishina formula, which predicts that the probability of a Compton
event generally decreases with increasing energy. However, this decrease is a
very gradual one, taking place over the very highest energies of interest in
diagnostic imaging. Over the range of energies of importance in x-ray imaging,
the probability is reasonably constant. In summary, we conclude that
Prob[Compton event] ∝ ED . (4.12)
2For high Z materials (as opposed to human tissues), it is more nearly proportional to Z3
eff.