276 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
Gaussian function. Accordingly [see (3.23)], we deﬁne
hI(x, y) = exp
{
−4(x2 + y2)l n2/R2
I
}
, (8.18)
the intrinsic PSF of an Anger camera. Unlike collimator resolution, intrinsic
resolution is not dependent on the target or its range. We can factor intrinsic
resolution into our imaging equation for a planar source as follows:
φ(x, y) = Ahfz0 (x, y) 1
4πz2
0
exp
{
−
∫ 0
z0
μ(x, y, z′;E) dz′
}
∗ hC(x, y;|z0|) ∗ hI(x, y) .
(8.19)
Generally, intrinsic resolution is much better than collimator resolution (i.e.,
RI ≪ RC) at typical imaging depths, so the collimator’s geometric characteris-
tics dominate effective resolution. The effective resolution is the result of the
subsystem cascade of R
I and RC, as discussed in Section 3.3.4.
8.4.2 Sensitivity
As noted above, not every gamma ray leaving the body will be directed at
the camera. If possible, we would like to detect those that are directed at the
camera in the right direction. There are two major factors that may prevent
such detection. First, the photon may be absorbed in the collimator; second,
the photon may pass through both the collimator and the scintillation crystal.
A very high sensitivity (or efﬁciency) camera will detect most photons; a very
low sensitivity (or efﬁciency) camera will reject or miss most photons. Most
cameras are somewhere in-between; we now characterize sensitivity in more
detail.
Collimator Sensitivity From (8.13), we can see that longer collimator holes
yield better resolution (smaller RC). When the holes are made longer, however,
fewer gamma ray photons that impinge upon the collimator will actually pass
through it and reach the scintillator crystal. This means that the collimator is
less efﬁcient or less sensitive. The collimator efﬁciency ϵ, also called collimator
sensitivity, is given by
ϵ =
( Kd
2
le(d + h)
)2
, (8.20)
where K ≈ 0.25. The quantity ϵ reﬂects the fraction of photons (on average)
that pass through the collimator for each emitted photon directed at the camera.
All else being equal, we would like to choose collimator parameters that make
ϵ as large as possible.
The resolution of a parallel hole collimator is best at the collimator surface
and degrades with distance |z|, as shown in (8.13). On the other hand, (8.20)
shows that the sensitivity is independent of the distance between the source and