8 Chapter 1 Introduction
• Digital radiography, which includes all the scans in routine radiography, but
with images that are recorded digitally instead of on ﬁlm
• Angiography, including universal angiography and angiocardiography, in
which the systems are specialized for imaging the body’s blood arteries and
vessels
• Neuroradiology, which includes specialized x-ray systems for precision
studies of the skull and cervical spine
• Mobile x-ray systems, which are small x-ray units designed for operating
rooms or emergency vehicles
• Mammography, which includes ﬁlm-based or digital-based systems opti-
mized for breast imaging
All of these modalities are called ‘‘projection’’ radiography because they all
represent the projection of a 3-D object or signal onto a 2-D image.
The common element in all of these systems is the x-ray tube. As we will
see in Chapter 5, the x-ray tube generates an x-ray pulse in an approximately
uniform ‘‘cone beam’’ (shaped like a cone) geometry. This pulse passes through
the body and is attenuated by the intervening tissues. The x-ray intensity
proﬁle across the beam exiting from the body is no longer uniform—shadows
have been created by dense objects (such as bone) in the body. This intensity
distribution is revealed using a scintillator, which converts the x-rays to visible
light. Finally, the light image on the scintillator is captured either on a large
sheet of photographic ﬁlm, a camera, or solid-state detectors.
The most common modality in projection radiography is the chest x-ray;
a typical unit is shown in Figure 1.1(a). Here, the x-ray tube is located on the
column projecting down from the ceiling. The scintillator and detector can be
located either in the pedestal unit on the right or in the table itself. The radiologic
technologist stands at a console not shown, protected by lead, but able to see
through a window. A typical chest x-ray is shown in Figure 1.1(b). This image
shows the spine, ribs, heart, lungs, and many other features radiologists are
trained to identify and interpret. A key feature of this image is that structures
located at different depths in the body are overlaid (or superimposed) on the
2-D image. For example, we can see both front and back ribs in the chest x-ray
in Figure 1.1(b). This is a property of projection imaging, and it is common to
Figure 1.1
(a) A chest x-ray unit and
(b) a chest x-ray image.
Source: Courtesy of GE
Healthcare.
 (a)( b)