142 Chapter 5 Projection Radiography
Figure 5.7
Various compensation
ﬁlters. (Adapted from
Carlton and Adler, 2001,
and Wolbarst, 1993.)
Wedge
filter Trough
filter
Trough
filter
(a) (b) (c)
ﬁlter is thicker where the body part is thinner and vice versa so that the x-ray
detector requires a smaller dynamic range.
Contrast Agents Differential attenuation in the body gives rise to contrast
in the x-ray image. Put another way, in order to see the difference between
anatomical structures on a radiograph, these structures must have different
x-ray attenuations. Often, however, different soft tissue structures are difﬁcult
to visualize because of insufﬁcient intrinsic contrast. This situation can be
improved by using contrast agents—chemical compounds that are introduced
into the body in order to increase x-ray absorption within the anatomical regions
into which they are introduced, thereby enhancing x-ray contrast (compared
with neighboring regions without such agents).
The two most common contrast agents used in x-ray diagnosis are iodine
(Z = 53) and barium ( Z = 56). In addition to their relatively high atomic
numbers, iodine and barium also have K-shell electrons whose binding energy
falls within the diagnostic x-ray energy range; E
k = 33.2 keV for iodine and
Ek = 37.4 keV for barium. As we have already discussed, when the energy of
x-ray photons slightly exceeds the K-shell binding energy of a material, the
probability of photoelectric interaction signiﬁcantly rises. Such a photoelectric
interaction will cause electrons from the K-shell to be ejected, and the x-
ray photons will be completely absorbed. This effect, called K-edge absorption,
signiﬁcantly increases the attenuation coefﬁcient of the material in x-ray energies
slightly higher than the K-shell energy. The linear attenuation coefﬁcients of
bone, muscle, fat, and two contrast agents, one made using iodine and one
using barium, are shown in Figure 5.8. This stepwise increase in attenuation
apparent in these plots is called the K absorption edge; the location of these
edges on the energy scale is directly related to the energies of the characteristic
radiations of the contrast agents themselves. There is a dramatically higher
absorption of x-rays that are slightly above the K-edge, leading to a very
high differential absorption between the contrast agent and the surrounding
tissues. These physical properties make iodine and barium radiologically ideal
compounds for enhancing contrast.
Because iodine is naturally abundant in the thyroid gland, the thyroid itself is
readily imaged in x-ray studies. Fortunately, iodine can also be synthesized into