5.2 Instrumentation 145
Grids that have tall lead strips or ﬁne lead strip spacing—that is, higher
grid ratios—are more capable of stopping off-axis radiation. However, there is
a price to be paid for using grids. As the lead strips become wider or are packed
more closely together in an effort to stop more scattered photons from reaching
the detector, they will also stop some photons in the primary beam. This loss of
beam intensity can increase image noise. To maintain a high-quality image, it
then becomes necessary to increase the amount of radiation arriving at the grid,
which increases the radiation dose to the patient. The grid conversion factor
(GCF) characterizes the amount of additional exposure required for a particular
grid. GCF is deﬁned as
GCF = mAs with the grid
mAs without the grid . (5.2)
Typical GCF values range from 3 to 8.
Having GCFs in the range 3–8 implies that some grids can absorb a large
fraction of the incident radiation, so the impact of a grid should not be ignored.
Since Compton scattering events are more isotropic at lower energies, it may
not be necessary to use a grid at lower energies. A rule of thumb in projection
radiography is to use a grid when the tube voltage is above 60 kVp. Compton
scattering also increases with the thickness of the body part. Another rule of
thumb in projection radiography is to use a grid when imaging a body part
thicker than 10 cm.
Grids can be mounted as stationary grids or used with a Potter-Bucky
diaphragm, which moves the grid during exposure. The reason that Potter-
Bucky grids are desirable is that stationary grids—especially those with low grid
frequency—can introduce visible artifacts—lines or grid lines—into the image.
The Potter-Bucky diaphragm causes the grid to move 2–3 cm during exposure
in a linear or circular path. Since the lead strips within the grid move during
exposure, their x-ray shadow also moves across the image plane, and its image
is blurred out while the image of the patient is not blurred at all.
Grids are used for nearly all x-ray examinations. The type of grid used varies
with the examination. For example, thin body parts (e.g., extremities) generate
less scatter than thick body parts (e.g., abdomen or chest), so a lower grid ratio
might be employed for extremity exams than for abdominal exams.
Airgaps Physical separation of the detector and the object—that is, leaving an
airgap between the patient and the detector—is an effective means of scatter
rejection. Because the scattered photons diverge radially from their point of
origin inside the object, while the primary beam photons diverge from the
source, separating the source and detector reduces the percentage of scattered
photons that reach the plane of the detector. This can be demonstrated by simple
geometry. The price that is paid for this airgap method of scatter reduction is
increased geometric magniﬁcation and increased blurring or unsharpness due to
x-ray focal spot size effects (see Section 5.4).
Scanning Slits The use of mechanical lead slits that are placed in front of
and/or in back of the patient has been evaluated and are used in some systems.
These slits are moved together during the x-ray exposure, effectively providing