272 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
particularly useful when we begin incorporating other effects such as blurring
and noise in the next section.
The source or object in nuclear medicine imaging is the activity concentration
f (x, y, z). Let us deﬁne a planar sourcefz0 (x, y) which has radioactivity restricted
to the plane deﬁned by z = z0; in other words,
f (x, y, z) = fz0 (x, y)δ(z − z0) . (8.10)
Because the units of δ(z) are inverse length (e.g., m −1), we recognize that the
new source fz0 (x, y) has units of planar activity concentration (e.g., Bq/m 2). Of
course, z0 < 0 in order to conform to the geometry of Figure 8.9. Substituting
(8.10) into (8.7) and applying the sifting property of the impulse function
[see (2.6)] yields
φ(xd, yd) = Ahfz0 (xd, yd) 1
4πz2
0
exp
{
−
∫ 0
z0
μ(xd, yd, z′;E) dz′
}
. (8.11)
Using (8.8) we see that the mean pixel count in pixel k is
nk = ϵTAkAhfz0 (xk, yk) 1
4πz2
0
exp
{
−
∫ 0
z0
μ(xk, yk, z′;E) dz′
}
. (8.12)
Equation (8.12) shows that the mean pixel count in an image of a planar
source represents the planar activity concentration within the source plane scaled
by three factors. This ﬁrst factor ϵTA
kAh is image acquisition or instrument
design variables that can be controlled to some extent. To get higher counts, we
can increase the efﬁciency, acquisition time, pixel size, or collimator hole size.
This all makes perfect sense, but by this point in the book we know there will be
tradeoffs in image quality that must be considered when taking any one of these
measures. The second factor 1/(4πz
2
0) represents a signal loss due to the inverse
square law. The signal loss, while dependent onz0, is uniform in the plane—that
is, independent of x and y—so it does not affect the relative amplitudes of the
radioactive sources as they appear on the detector plane. The second factor is
the effect of the integrated attenuation of photons as they travel from the plane
z = z
0 to the plane z = 0. Unless μ(x, y, z;E) is itself independent of x and y in
the range z ∈ [z0, 0]—which is not likely in realistic scenarios—then this term
is not uniform, and it causes a variation of the relative source amplitudes across
the image plane. This emphasizes the inherent difﬁculty, even for ideal planar
sources, in comparing relative intensities between sources located at different
points within a planar scintigraphic image.
8.4 Image Quality
There are many factors that affect the performance of Anger cameras, including
spatial resolution, sensitivity, and ﬁeld uniformity. Modern Anger cameras
contain correction circuitry to improve performance in these areas as much as
possible. We now explore these and other factors affecting image quality in
planar scintigraphy.