PART
IV
Ultrasound Imaging
Overview
In the preceding two parts of the book, we considered those imaging modalities
that rely on ionizing radiation to create the signals. We saw that these modalities
produce images of structure and function through a variety of mechanisms, all
based on ionizing radiation. The modalities are of high clinical utility—that is
why they are so commonly used—but the use of ionizing radiation carries some
risk. At the low doses used in medical imaging, the main biological risk is cancer;
the probability of inducing cancer from a diagnostic imaging examination is
very, very low, but it is not zero. Sometimes this is of concern, such as when
imaging in utero.
Here, we examine a modality considered to be fully noninvasive and risk
free: ultrasound imaging. In projection radiography and computed tomography,
we were interested in the transmission of a beam of radiation through the
patient; the medical signal of interest was produced by the variable attenuation
of this beam by body tissues. In contrast, with ultrasound, we are interested in
the reﬂection of a beam of sound by internal structures within the patient. The
medical signal of interest here is produced by the variable reﬂectance of this
sound beam by different body tissues.
A basic ultrasound imaging system consists of a transducer and associated
electronics, including a display. The transducer itself is both a transmitter and
receiver of ultrasound energy. In practice, the electronics ‘‘steer’’ the beam so
that (typically) an arc is covered within the patient, producing a 2-D image on
the display. Many modern systems have 3-D capability whereby they produce
successive 2-D arcs on different planes which, when pieced together, form a
3-D volumetric image. Therefore, in its most basic form, ultrasound imaging
systems can be used to directly visualize the shape and size of various anatomical
structures of interest.
The most common ultrasound procedures involve imaging the developing
fetus in uteroand echocardiography for heart imaging. A representative echocar-
diogram is shown in Figure IV.1(a). Here, the transducer is positioned at the tip