8.4 Image Quality 279
It is now well-known that the majority of the nonuniformity in a camera
occurs as a result ofspatial distortion; that is, the mispositioning of events (errors
in determining the (X, Y) location). To correct this distortion, reference images
are acquired, and digital correction maps generated and stored. Each map con-
tains values that represent (X, Y) correction shifts. Sophisticated microprocessor
circuitry is used to reposition each count in real time during acquisition using
these shifts. With many current cameras, it is best to acquire correction maps
with the same radionuclide that is used for patient imaging. In some cameras,
several sets of corrections maps are stored on the computer, representing all the
radionuclides used in the nuclear medicine department, and the appropriate set
chosen for a given patient study.
Variation in the position of a pulse from different areas of the camera
within the pulse height window can also produce nonuniformities. This spatially
dependent energy variation may also be corrected by microprocessor circuitry.
The combination of energy variation and spatial distortion is responsible for
loss of spatial resolution and imperfect linearity and uniformity. In today’s
cameras, explicit uniformity correction is typically carried out with multiplicative
factors, only after spatial distortion (and spatially dependent energy response)
corrections.
8.4.4 Energy Resolution
Pulse height analysis is critical for rejection of scattered photons, whose inclusion
in the image would reduce contrast. Thus, the performance of the detector
system, and especially its energy resolution, is critical. In an ideal detector, the
photopeak would be a single vertical line at that pulse height representing the
energy of the emitted x-ray or gamma ray. In reality, the statistical nature of
the light emission and the ﬁnite energy resolution of the detector system smears
out this line, producing a bell-shaped photopeak. In essence, the observed pulse
height spectrum can be treated as the convolution of the ideal spectrum with the
energy impulse response function of the system.
The worse the energy resolution of the detector system, the broader the
photopeak. Energy resolution can be quantiﬁed as the FWHM of the photopeak
in a fashion similar to the use of FWHM to characterize spatial resolution.
This is measured by ﬁrst determining the counts at the peak of the photopeak
and locating the points on either side of the peak where the counts are half of
the peak counts. The width of the photopeak in pulse height units is obtained
by subtracting the lower pulse height from the upper. Finally, this width is
divided by the pulse height at the apex of the photopeak to yield a percentage of
energy resolution measurement. The smaller the number, the better the energy
resolution; typical scintillation detector systems average 8–12 percent FWHM.
It is important to note that the time resolution of the scintillation detector system
also plays a role in energy resolution, in that two scintillation events occurring
within the time resolution will produce a single, sum pulse. There is clearly a
relation between energy resolution and the optimum width of the pulse height
window discussed in Section 8.2.6 and illustrated in Figure 8.5.
In order to calibrate a pulse height analyzer to establish the quantitative
relationship between energy deposited and pulse height, either the applied
voltage across the PMT or the ampliﬁcation in the electronics is adjusted until