6.4 Image Quality in CT 213
for certain types of studies. These protocols balance the conﬂicting requirements
of image quality with FOV requirements and speed of acquisition.
6.3.6 Cone Beam CT
With the goal of rapid coverage and reconstruction of 3-D volumes, it is natural
to consider the use of a cone beam radiation pattern and an area detector (rather
than a fan-beam and a linear detector). A standard ﬂuoroscope, for example,
can rotate the cone-beam source and 2-D detector in a circle around the body,
electronically recording 2-D projection images at a collection of different angles.
Also, the geometry of MDCT systems with large-area detectors is correctly
understood to be in the form of a cone beam. In either case, the data within
the plane of the circular source path are exactly what one achieves with a
conventional fan-beam CT scanner; thus, an image can be reconstructed by
conventional means for this central image plane. It turns out, however, that
there is not sufﬁcient coverage to yield mathematically correct reconstructions
in any other plane through the object. The situation is further complicated by
the fact that projections are often truncated; that is, the body extends beyond
the x-ray cone.
Despite these complications, so-called cone beam reconstruction algorithms
have been developed to produce excellent 3-D reconstructions. The Feldkamp
algorithm is the most well known and has been shown to produce excellent
reconstructions for the geometry described above.
6.3.7 Iterative Reconstruction
For the past 40 years, commercial CT systems have all used variants of CBP
for image reconstruction. However, current systems are rapidly changing over
to iterative reconstruction methods because they offer equivalent (or better)
reconstruction quality at substantially reduced dose. We describe iterative
reconstruction methods in Chapter 9, when describing emission tomography
systems.
Iterative reconstruction methods are more computationally demanding than
CBP. Since emission tomography’s data requirements are lower than that of
most other imaging modalities (because larger and thus fewer voxels are used
to represent a 3D volume), iterative reconstruction methods were introduced
roughly two decades ago for emission tomographic reconstruction and are thus
more fully developed in that application. Also, emission tomography is signiﬁ-
cantly limited by noise, especially compared with most other imaging modalities,
and iterative reconstruction methods are particularly adept at handling noise.
The application of iterative reconstruction methods to CT is conceptually
straightforward and follows the same development as in Chapter 9 for emission
tomography.
6.4 Image Quality in CT
While the theory presented in the previous sections captures the ideal behavior
of CT systems, in practice there are limitations to what one can achieve. It is not
possible to achieve arbitrarily high resolution, since detectors have ﬁnite widths