62 Chapter 3 Image Quality
The resulting image g(x, y) is only a function of x,s a yl(x). This is known
as the line spread function(LSF) of the system under consideration, and it can
be used to quantify resolution. This function is directly related to the PSFh(x, y)
since, from (3.13), we have
l(x) =
∫ ∞
−∞
h(x, η) dη. (3.14)
Notice that, since the PSF h(x, y) is assumed to be isotropic, l(x)i ss y m m e t r i c
[i.e., l(x) = l(−x)], and since the PSF is normalized to 1,
∫ ∞
−∞
l(x) dx = 1. (3.15)
Moreover, the 1-D Fourier transform L(u)o ft h eL S F l(x) is related to the
transfer function H(u, v) of the system, since
L(u) = F1D[l](u)
=
∫ ∞
−∞
l(x)e−j2πux dx
=
∫ ∞
−∞
∫ ∞
−∞
h(x, η)e−j2πux dx dη
= H(u,0 ). (3.16)
Therefore, the values of the transfer function along the horizontal line that
passes through the origin of the frequency domain are adequate for determining
the 1-D Fourier transform of the LSF, and hence the LSF itself. Since the PSF
h(x, y) is assumed to be isotropic, the transfer function is isotropic as well. Thus,
the LSF is adequate for determining the PSF of the system. Indeed, from the
LSF l(x), we can calculate the 1-D Fourier transform L(u), and H(u,0 ) = L(u).
However, since the transfer function H(u, v) is isotropic, the values of H(u, v)
along any line that passes through the origin of the frequency domain will be
the same as the values of H(u,0 ) .
3.3.2 Full Width at Half Maximum
Given the LSF (or the PSF) of a medical imaging system, its resolution can be
quantiﬁed using a measure called the full width at half maximum (FWHM).
This is the (full) width of the LSF (or the PSF) at one-half its maximum value.
The FWHM is usually expressed in millimeters. Provided there is no geometric
scaling, the FWHM equals the minimum distance that two lines (or points)
must be separated in space in order to appear as separate in the recorded image.
This is depicted in Figure 3.6, where we see the proﬁles of two points through
a 1-D imaging system with PSF h(x). The points move closer to each other as
we go from (a) to (d). In a linear system, the observed proﬁle is the sum of the
individual proﬁles from the two points. In practice, a residual ‘‘dip’’ between the
points must occur in the (summed) proﬁle for the two points to be visualized or
resolved as separate. The proﬁle depicted in Figure 3.6(c) shows the separation