316 Chapter 9 Emission Computed Tomography
then compared by subtraction to the actual observation. Thus, if the computed
measurements agree with the measurements for all measurements, there will be
no change in the object and the solution has been found. In general, a more
modest criterion, such as an iteration producing only a very small change to ˆf,
is a more reasonable stopping criterion.
Maximum Likelihood by Expectation Maximization (ML-EM) The ART
method captures the underlying concept of iterative reconstruction in
mathematics quite elegantly. However, it is not used in practice, primarily
because it does not consider the random factors that are inherent in both SPECT
and PET systems. We see how the matrix A can, in principle, incorporate
many deterministic factors such as detector size, shape, and efﬁciency, and
object attenuation, but it is not immediately clear how one would incorporate
the Poisson nature of photon counting and such factors as scattering and
random coincidences. The maximum likelihood by expectation maximization
(ML-EM) methods address this issue; they have become the most popular
class of reconstruction algorithms in clinical use in emission tomography
because they are capable of incorporating all of these deterministic and
probabilistic factors.
The ML-EM method starts with an imaging equation that directly expresses
the number of photon counts that are expected in a detector. For example, (9.6)
and (9.20) will work for SPECT and PET, respectively. We assume the same
pixel basis as in (9.28) and ﬁnite number of observations as in ART above, and
derive from the geometry the coefﬁcients a
ij that will transform the pixel having
activity concentration fj in it to the measurement gi. We can also add a factor to
be determined from experiment (and thereafter assumed to be known) reﬂecting
the extra counts
ri that are expected to arise in detector i due to scattering and
random coincidences, leading to the discrete imaging equation
ni(f) =
m∑
j=1
aijfj + ri . (9.35)
In Sections 9.3.2 and 9.3.3, we discuss the estimation of the extra counts ri.
We know that the quantity ni(f) represents the mean number of counts,
whereas the actual observed count is the realization of a Poisson random variable
with this mean. The form of the Poisson probability mass function can now be
used to set up a likelihood function, which assumes that the actual observations
ni, i = 1, ... , n are known—that is, they have been observed during image
acquisition—and the image values are the unknowns. The maximum likelihood
(ML) estimate is deﬁned as the collection of image pixel values f (or fj,
j = 1, ... , m) that together maximize the likelihood function (or the logarithm
of the likelihood function). Although various algorithms have been deﬁned to
try to ﬁnd the ML solution, the most popular and computationally convenient
method is the ML-EM method, which is inherently iterative.
The ML-EM algorithm seeks to ﬁnd the image pixel values f that maximize
the logarithm of the Poisson likelihood objective function, which is given by
L(f) =
m∑
i=1
ni ln ni(f) − ni(f) . (9.36)