CHAPTER
44
Physics of
Radiography
4.1 Introduction
This chapter provides an introduction to the physics behind x-ray imaging
modalities. Broadly speaking, these modalities can be divided into two types,
projection radiography and computed tomography, which we cover in the
next two chapters. These modalities do not involve radioactivity (a common
misconception), so we delay the introduction of radioactivity until Chapter 7,
where it is needed for the presentation of the nuclear medicine modalities in
Chapters 8 and 9.
As we pointed out in Chapter 1, x-rays were discovered in 1895 by Roentgen
while working with a Crooke’s tube (a precursor to the modern x-ray tube).
He noticed that ‘‘rays of mysterious origin,’’ which he named x-rays, caused a
ﬂuorescent plate to glow. Upon investigation, he determined that these rays were
in fact produced by the tube. The ﬁrst radiograph of a human being—the hand
of Roentgen’s wife—was made by Roentgen within a month of the discovery.
Roentgen’s discovery of x-rays and their immediate application to imaging the
human body truly mark the birth of medical imaging.
Today, we know that x-rays are electromagnetic (EM) waves whose fre-
quencies are much higher than those of visible light. They are only one form
of ionizing radiation —that is, radiation capable of ejecting electrons from
atoms—used in medical imaging, however. Other forms of ionizing radiation
used in medical imaging include particulate radiation and gamma rays.B o t h
particulate radiation and gamma rays can be products of radioactive decay, and
we will have more to say about this in Chapter 7. It also turns out that an
electron beam, which is a form of particulate radiation, is used in the produc-
tion of x-rays. So, we need to study certain aspects of particulate radiation in
this chapter as well. Furthermore, gamma rays, like x-rays, are high-frequency
EM waves. So, in studying the propagation properties of x-rays, we are also
implicitly studying the same for gamma rays.
This chapter provides a necessary background for all imaging modali-
ties that use ionizing radiation, including projection radiography (Chapter 5),
106