Problems 283
projection images of radiotracer distribution using an Anger scintillation camera.
In this chapter, we presented the following key concepts that you should now
understand:
1. Planar scintigraphyis the nuclear medicine analog of projection radiography.
2. Planar scintigraphy makes use of an Anger scintillation camera , which
consists of a collimator,a scintillation crystal, photomultiplier tubes, posi-
tioning logic,a pulse height analyzer, and an image capture device(today, a
computer).
3. Typical collimators include parallel-hole, converging, diverging, andpinhole.
4. Event positioning is based on a center-of-mass calculation; unlike radio-
graphic image formation, this takes place on a photon-by-photon basis.
5. The basic imaging equation includes terms for both activity (the desired
parameter) and attenuation (an undesired, but extremely important, addi-
tional factor); these two terms are not separable.
6. Image quality depends on resolution (governed by both the collimator and
the intrinsic resolution of the camera), noise (governed by the sensitivity of
the system, the injected activity, and the acquisition time), and count rate
factors.
Further Reading
Cherry, S.R., Sorenson, J.A., and Phelps, M.E.
Physics in Nuclear Medicine, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, PA: W. B. Saunders, 2012.
Christian, P.E. and Waterstram-Rich, K.M.Nuclear
Medicine and PET/CT: Technology and Tech-
niques, 7th ed. New York: Elsevier/Mosby,
2012.
Rollo, F.D. Nuclear Medicine Physics: Instrumenta-
tion and Agents. St. Louis, MO: C. V. Mosby,
1977.
Problems
Instrumentation
8.1 (a) Explain with diagrams the design and operation of an Anger gamma
camera.
(b) What are some of the physical considerations when choosing which
radionuclide to use for imaging.
8.2 Suppose you are designing a collimator to be used in an Anger camera.
Assume the radiotracer used emits 140 keV gamma rays and the collimator
surface-to-patient distance r is 10 cm.
(a) What is the minimum septal thickness h required for the septal pene-
tration to be less than 60% for gamma rays incident at 45◦?
(b) Suppose the resolution and sensitivity of the collimator are given by:
Resolution = d
(
1 + r
l
)
, Sensitivity = d4
l2(d + h)2 ,