118 Chapter 4 Physics of Radiography
This implies that the maximum energy loss occurs when the photon is deﬂected
180◦ back towards the source, that is, a 180◦ backscatter. The kinetic energy of
the Compton electron is given by
Ee− = hν − hν′ . (4.9)
EXAMPLE 4.3
Compton scattering is usually undesirable in medical imaging. In planar scintigraphy
(Chapter 8), the energy of a photon is used to determine whether it has been scattered
prior to arrival at the detector.
Question Suppose a photon with energy hν = 100 keV is incident to some material
and exits with energy hν′. A detector decides that the photon has not been scattered if
hν′ > 98 keV. What is the maximum angle by which the photon is scattered but is still
being treated as a photon traveling along a straight path?
Answer The energy of the photon after Compton scattering is
hν′ = hν
1 + (1 − cos θ)hν/(m0c2)
= 100 keV
1 + (1 − cos θ)100 keV/(511 keV)
= 98 keV
θ = cos−1
(
1 − 511
100 ∗ 49
)
= 26.4◦
So, a photon scattered by an angle up to 26 .4◦ is still considered as traveling along a
straight path by the detector.
Probability of EM Interactions We now consider the factors that make photo-
electric and Compton events more likely to occur. There are many reasons why
this subject is important. For example, the formation of a useful projection radio-
graph depends on the differential attenuationof an x-ray beam passing through
a patient, which is caused by the photoelectric effect and Compton scattering,
as we shall see in the next chapter. As another example, we observed above
that the photoelectric effect causes complete absorption of an incident photon.
Therefore, if we ﬁnd a way to increase the likelihood of photoelectric events, we
can block or shield objects (or patients, staff, and physicians) from the source of
ionizing EM radiation. We should therefore be able to understand what makes
lead a good x-ray shield while plastic is not; we should also be able to predict
whether lead will shield high-energy photons better than low-energy photons. As
another example, the reason why Compton scattering is detrimental to imaging
is that it causes photons to deviate from straight-line paths. We would like to
know the conditions under which Compton scattering is large so that instru-
mentation can be designed to compensate for its effects. We might choose to use
x-ray energies that minimize the Compton scattering effect to image patients.
Consider a thin ‘‘slab’’ of material having a ﬁxed thickness. Suppose
that an incident photon can either pass through the material or experience a