Problems 291
The burst of light from a scintillator—the Z-pulse—lasts for a brief
moment every time a gamma ray hits it. Let us model this burst as a
triangle with peak height A (e.g., in volts), dropping linearly to zero
in 250 μs, as shown in Figure P8.8. The pulse height analyzer detects
peaks and records their peak voltage. For the pulse shown in Figure P8.8,
therefore, the pulse height analyzer records the value A. Assume that the
response of two or more gamma rays is the sum of their Z-pulses, delayed
in time according to their time-of-arrival.
Figure P8.8
Z-pulse waveform. See
Problem 8.19.
Z-pulse
A
0 250 Time (/H9262s)
(b) Draw the combined Z-pulse arising from two photons, one striking
the camera at t = 0 and the other at t = 100 μs. What will the output
of the pulse height analyzer be? (It should be a sequence of heights at
different times.)
Assume the photopeak is set at A and a ±20% discriminator window is
used.
(c) Because of the discriminator, the second photon may not be detected if
it arrives too soon after the ﬁrst. Determine the time separation required
in order for the second photon to be detected as a separate event.
(d) Is it theoretically possible to complete the experiment in the time you
computed in part (a)? Explain.
(e) Under what condition(s) will a photon be rejected because its Z-pulse
height is too small? Explain.
(f) Assume that the experiment is concluded when 2,000,000 counts are
accepted no matter how long it takes. What is the intrinsic SNR in a
single pixel?
8.20 A small pellet is located at the origin and ﬁlled with a radiotracer, as
shown in Figure P8.9(a). Assume a two-dimensional scenario in which
the pellet emits gamma rays only in the x-y plane and the radioactivity is
equal to A = 0.027 mCi.
(a) What is the average rate of photons hitting the detector (1-D Anger
camera)?
Assume the detector is made of NaI(Tl) ( μ = 0.644 cm
−1) and its
thickness is b = 2.5c m .
(b) What is the detector efﬁciency at the center of the detector?
(c) If the Anger camera is rotated stepwise around the origin and requires
2 × 105 detected counts at each orientation, how many orientations
can be captured in 10 seconds? (Ignore rotation time.)