4.4 Nature and Properties of Ionizing Radiation 117
Figure 4.6
The photoelectric effect,
shown in (a) and (b), and
Compton scattering,
shown in (c).
Incident photon
Incident photon
Incident photon
(a)
(b)
(c)
Photoelectron
Photoelectron
Auger
electron
Compton
electron
Compton
angle
Compton
photon
Characteristic
radiation
u
by the atom, and the ejected electron, called a photoelectron, propagates away
with energy
Ee− = hν − EB , (4.7)
where EB is the binding energy of the ejected electron. The remaining atom is now
an ion, having a hole, typically in the K-shell, which must be ﬁlled. The hole is
ﬁlled by an electron transition from a higher orbit, which produces characteristic
radiation, as discussed above and shown in Figure 4.6(a). Sometimes, the
characteristic x-ray transfers its energy to an outer-orbit electron, called an
Auger electron, which is ejected from the atom, accompanied by a readjustment
of the remaining electron orbits, as shown in Figure 4.6(b). Photoelectrons and
Auger electrons are energetic electrons that are free to interact with matter in
the ways we described in the previous section. We will see below that these
energetic electrons contribute to the detrimental biological effects of ionizing
EM radiation by contributing radiation dose to the patient.
Compton Scattering In Compton scattering, as shown in Figure 4.6(c), a
photon with energy hν ejects a valence (outer-shell) electron, yielding a new
energetic electron called a Compton electron. As a result of this interaction,
the incident photon loses energy (to the Compton electron) and changes its
direction. The energy of the scattered photon, the so-calledCompton photon,i s
given by
hν′ = hν
1 + (1 − cos θ)hν/(m0c2) , (4.8)
where m0c2 = 511 keV is the energy equivalent to the rest massm0 of an electron,
and θ is the angle through which the photon is scattered [see Figure 4.6(c)]. We
see that the amount of energy remaining with the Compton photon depends on
the scatter angle. The more the photon is deﬂected, the more energy it loses.