5.2 Instrumentation 151
ranges of digital image created by scanning a PSP can be dramatically different
depending on the anatomy being imaged as well as the kVp and mAs selected
by the operator.
Unlike ﬁlm, which saturates at high x-ray exposures, PSPs can store perfectly
viable latent images over a wide range of incident x-ray exposures. This means
that fewer images are ‘‘spoiled’’ by having poor latent images through improper
x-ray tube parameter selection, but the downside is that very different dynamic
ranges must be anticipated. Most systems use an air ionization photocell to
perform AEC, as previously described for ﬁlm-based radiography. The technician
must specify an appropriate exposure based on the patient size and anatomy
being imaged. Many systems also permit some preprocessing of the scanned
images prior to ﬁnalizing them for the patient record, which permits additional
speciﬁcation of the image values in accordance with expected norms. Another
somewhat unfortunate downside of the fact that few images are spoiled in CR
acquisition is that, since lower exposures cause the usual quantum noise and
higher exposures simply improve signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), there is a natural
tendency to use higher x-ray exposures in CR. It is important to gaurd against
this tendency since higher exposures yield higher doses to the patients.
It turns out that the process of reading a PSP does not liberate all the
electrons that are stored in the plate; in fact, a PSP can be scanned more than
once without much degradation. In order to reuse the plate—that is, to create a
new x-ray image—it must ﬁrst be erased, which is accomplished very simply by
exposing it to very bright light. Usually this is done in the same mechanical unit
that reads the plate.
CCD-Based Digital Radiography Systems Charge coupled device (CCD) detec-
tors combine a collection of light-sensitive capacitors, which store charge in
proportion to incident light, with a CCD, which uses a linear charge transfer
to permit a high-ﬁdelity readout of the stored charges. Two-dimensional CCD
detector arrays capture 2-D light images and are used in high-quality photo-
graphic equipment today. Their use in x-ray imaging is made possible simply
by using a scintillator, typically Tl-doped CsI, to convert the x-rays to visible
light.
The main obstacle to the use of CCD detectors in projection radiography is
that they are small devices, while the ﬁeld of view of most x-ray examinations is
large. The most straightforward approach to solve this problem is the use of a
lens to demagnify the scintillator image so that it ﬁts within the optical window
of the CCD array. With a typical ﬁeld-of-view and typical CCD detector size,
demagniﬁcation by a factor of roughly 10:1 is necessary. For example, to match
a4 4c m × 44 cm ﬁeld of view (FOV) to a 4 cm × 4 cm CCD with 3,000 ×
3,000 pixels, each 0.013 mm × 0.013 mm, a demagniﬁcation factor of just over
11 is required. However, it turns out that there is a signiﬁcant loss of light—as
much as 99%—with such demagniﬁcation, and this yields signiﬁcantly higher
quantum noise in the resultant images. Use of higher x-ray doses can compensate
for this loss, and because of the very low cost of CCD detectors, this is one
approach that has been used to produce very low-cost digital x-ray systems.
Another way to use CCD detectors is in a so-called slot-scan geometry. In
this geometry, multiple CCD detector arrays are positioned in a line, long enough
to cover the entire ﬁeld of view (or a signiﬁcant fraction of the FOV) in one