Preface xvii
• A new section on iterative reconstruction in emission tomography in nuclear
medicine.
• New sections on nonlinear wave propagation and harmonic imaging in
ultrasound imaging.
• New development and presentation of imaging equations in planar scintig-
raphy, single photon emission computed tomography, and positron emission
tomography.
• New sections on three-dimensional imaging, noise, and speckle in ultrasound
imaging.
• New sections on susceptibility weighted imaging, functional magnetic res-
onance imaging, and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging in magnetic
resonance imaging.
• Reorganization of the chapters on signals and systems and image quality to
encourage a better pedagological ﬂow.
• Many new problems, added primarily to the chapters having relatively fewer
problems in the ﬁrst edition. There are a total of 261 problems in this second
edition.
Acknowledgments
Many students, friends, colleagues, and teaching assistants contributed to this
book through discussions and critiques. We wish to thank Elliot R. McVeigh and
John I. Goutsias, who co-taught our course at Johns Hopkins University during
the early years and helped draft the ﬁrst edition of the book. We are grateful to
Drs. Avneesh Chhabra, Harvey Ziessman, Peter Calabresi, and David Yousem
for providing several clinical images (and their descriptions) and to Vince Blasko
and Beatrice Mudge for providing several images depicting artifacts that can arise
in clinical imaging. Xiao Han, Xiaodong Tao, Li Pan, Vijay Parthasarathy, Tara
Johnson, Minnan Xu, Abd El-Monem El-Sharkawy, Kahaled Abd-Elmoniem,
Lotta Ellingsen, Jing Wan, Snehashis Roy, Harsh Agarwal, Issel Lim, Xian
Fan, Nan Li, Sahar Soleimanifard, Nathanel Kuo, Jeffrey Pompe, Min Chen,
Chuyang Ye, and Zhen Yang contributed problems and solutions, Dhruv Lamba
helped ﬁnd new images, and Aaron Carass ﬁxed many LaTeX problems. We are
grateful for the images provided to us by GE Healthcare, Philips Healthcare,
and Osirix. We thank J. Webster Stayman for reviewing the digital radiography
section. We would also like to thank six anonymous reviewers who provided
comments on their experiences with the ﬁrst edition, which provided a basis for
many of the changes we have made to this edition, and ﬁve anonymous reviewers
who reviewed a draft of this edition, which helped us to better balance material
in several sections. Finally, we would like to thank Dr. William R. Brody, who
inspired the creation of the course out of which this book emerged.
Jerry L. Prince
Jonathan M. Links