280 Chapter 8 Planar Scintigraphy
the photopeak from a known energy source falls at the desired pulse height.
Changing the applied voltage across the PMT changes the size of pulses coming
out of the detector by changing the ampliﬁcation in the tube. If the voltage
across each dynode is increased, electrons liberated from the previous dynode
gain more kinetic energy. Upon striking the next dynode, a larger number of
electrons are liberated. This leads to a larger signal from the PMT. Changing
the ampliﬁcation in the electronics directly changes the size of each pulse.
8.4.5 Noise
The entire imaging process, from gamma ray emission to electron cascade in a
PMT is governed by the Poisson probability law (as introduced in Section 3.4.3).
In particular, the number of detected photons (per unit area) is a Poisson random
variable (by way of analogy to the initial discussion in Section 6.4.2). In a Poisson
process, the variance is equal to the mean, which we have used to simplify the
analysis of noise in projection radiography. We now study the implication of
this fact for planar scintigraphy.
Signal-to-Noise Ratio Because both projection radiography and planar scintig-
raphy are ultimately limited by the total number of photons per unit area
contributing to image formation, the calculation of SNR is essentially the same
for the two modalities. In Chapter 5, we related intensity to the total number
of photons [see (5.35)] in projection radiography; this same relation appears
in (4.16), where we used the term energy ﬂuence rate instead of intensity.B y
way of analogy to Section 5.4.1, we will focus on N, the mean total number of
acquired photons.
The intrinsic SNR of the camera (for this acquisition) is [see (3.59)]
SNR = N√
N
=
√
N . (8.23)
Therefore, the intrinsic SNR of the image is made larger by increasing the
number of detected photons. This situation is identical to that of projection
radiography.
We know that in frame mode, the face of the Anger camera is divided into
a rectilinear grid of pixels. Suppose there are J × J pixels arranged in a square
grid covering the camera. Then, without any prior knowledge about the source,
we would expect to see the
N detected photons spread evenly over all J2 pixels.
Accordingly, the intrinsic SNR per pixel is given by
SNRp =
√
N
J2 =
√
N
J . (8.24)
An obvious, and important, implication of this equation is that the per-pixel SNR
decreases as the pixel size becomes smaller. This should help to explain why it
is not always advantageous to use a 512× 512 matrix for a planar scintigraphic
image. Aside from the fact that the camera may not have sufﬁcient resolution to
justify the implied pixel resolution, the SNR may drop precipitously, yielding a
severely degraded image.